
## LICENCE 

## for 

AS/NZS 1170.1:2002  Structural design actions - Permanent, imposed and other actions 

Licensee: Mr Peter Corish 

Date: Thursday, July 01, 2010 8:43 AM 

Licence Agreement 

This is an agreement between the end user of the Product ("Licensee") and SAI Global Limited, 286 Sussex Street, Sydney NSW 2000 AUSTRALIA, ABN 67 050 611 642. 


Australian Standards means Australian Standards and includes Joint ISO/Australian Standards, Joint NZ/Australian Standards, current Draft Australian Standards, and amendments to Australian Standards. 

Concurrent Users means the maximum number of people able to access the Product at any one time, and is limited to the number of Licences purchased. 

ISO Standards means Standards published by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), for which SAI Global is an authorised distributor. 

IEC Standards means Standards published by the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), for which SAI Global is an authorised distributor. 

Internal use means use of the Product within the Licensee’s organization. 

Licence means the right to access and use the Product. 

Licensee means the purchaser and user of the Product. 

Product means Australian Standards, ISO Standards and IEC Standards ordered and purchased through the infostore, and downloaded as electronic PDF files. 


## **Click on the red box above to activate the Licence Agreement scroll bar.** 

## WEB LINKS 




## Check if this document is current 

Find similar documents 

Visit our website 

International Standards on-line at infostore.saiglobal.com/store 





AS/NZS 1170.1:2002 (Incorporating Amendment Nos 1 and 2) 

## Australian/New Zealand Standard[™] 

## Structural design actions 

Part 1:  Permanent, imposed and other actions 


## AS/NZS 1170.1:2002 

This Joint Australian/New Zealand Standard was prepared by Joint Technical Committee BD-006, General Design Requirements and Loading on Structures. It was approved on behalf of the Council of Standards Australia on 29 March 2002 and on behalf of the Council of Standards New Zealand on 28 March 2002. This Standard was published on 4 June 2002. 

The following are represented on Committee BD-006: 

Association of Consulting Engineers Australia Australian Building Codes Board Australian Institute of Steel Construction Building Research Association of New Zealand Cement and Concrete Association of Australia CSIRO, Building, Construction and Engineering Cyclone Testing Station—James Cook University Electricity Supply Association of Australia Housing Industry Association Institution of Engineers Australia Institution of Professional Engineers New Zealand Master Builders Australia New Zealand Heavy Engineering Research Association Steel Reinforcement Institute of Australia University of Newcastle University of Auckland (New Zealand) University of Canterbury, New Zealand University of Melbourne 

## Keeping Standards up-to-date 

Standards are living documents which reflect progress in science, technology and systems. To maintain their currency, all Standards are periodically reviewed, and new editions are published. Between editions, amendments may be issued. Standards may also be withdrawn. It is important that readers assure themselves they are using a current Standard, which should include any amendments which may have been published since the Standard was purchased. 

Detailed information about joint Australian/New Zealand Standards can be found by visiting the Standards Web Shop at www.standards.com.au or Standards New Zealand web site at www.standards.co.nz and looking up the relevant Standard in the on-line catalogue. 

Alternatively, both organizations publish an annual printed Catalogue with full details of all current Standards. For more frequent listings or notification of revisions, amendments and withdrawals, Standards Australia and Standards New Zealand offer a number of update options. For information about these services, users should contact their respective national Standards organization. 

We also welcome suggestions for improvement in our Standards, and especially encourage readers to notify us immediately of any apparent inaccuracies or ambiguities. Please address your comments to the Chief Executive of either Standards Australia or Standards New Zealand at the address shown on the back cover. 

This Standard was issued in draft form for comment as DR 99310. 

AS/NZS 1170.1:2002 (Incorporating Amendment Nos 1 and 2) 

# Australian/New Zealand Standard[™] 

## Structural design actions 

Part 1:  Permanent, imposed and other actions 

Originated in Australia as part of AS CA1—1933. Originated in New Zealand as part of NZS 1900:1964. 

Previous Australian editions AS 1170.1—1989 and AS 2867—1986. Previous New Zealand edition NZS 4203:1992. AS 1170.1—1989, AS 2867—1986 and NZS 4203:1992 jointly revised, amalgamated and redesignated in part as AS/NZS 1170.1:2002. Reissued incorporating Amendment No. 1 (April 2005). Reissued incorporating Amendment No. 2 (January 2009). 

## COPYRIGHT 

© Standards Australia/Standards New Zealand 

All rights are reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or copied in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, without the written permission of the publisher. 

Jointly published by Standards Australia, GPO Box 476, Sydney, NSW 2001 and Standards New Zealand, Private Bag 2439, Wellington 6020 




## PREFACE 

This Standard was prepared by the Joint Standards Australia/Standards New Zealand Committee BD-006, General Design Requirements and Loading on Structures, to supersede, in part, AS 1170.1—1989, Minimum design loads on structures, Part 1:  Dead and live loads, and in part NZS 4203:1992, Code of practice for general structural design and design loadings for buildings and, in part, AS 2867—1986, Farm structures—General requirements for structural design. 

This Standard incorporates Amendments No. 1 (April 2005) and Amendment No. 2 (January 2009). The changes required by the Amendments are indicated in the text by a marginal bar and amendment number against the clause, note, table, figure, or part thereof affected. 

This Standard is published as a joint Standard (as are also AS/NZS 1170.0 and AS/NZS 1170.2) and it is intended that it is suitable for use in New Zealand as well as in Australia. However, NZS 4203, General structural design and design loadings for buildings remains current in New Zealand until the publication of all parts (including Part 4:  Earthquake action) and for a transition period afterwards. 

This Standard will be referenced in the Building Code of Australia by way of BCA Amendment 11 to be Published on 1 July 2002, thereby superseding the previous edition, AS 1170.1—1989, which will be withdrawn 12 months from the date of publication of this Edition. 

The objective of this Standard is to provide designers of structures with values representing the permanent actions, likely actions imposed due to use and occupancy, and other actions appropriate to the type of structure for use in structural design. 

A1 

This Standard is Part 1 of the 1170 series Structural design actions, which comprises the following parts, each of which has an accompanying Commentary published as a Supplement: 

AS/NZS 1170.0 Part 0: General principles 1170.1 Part 1: Permanent, imposed and other actions 1170.2 Part 2: Wind actions 1170.3 Part 3: Snow and ice actions AS 1170.4 Part 4: Earthquake loads NZS 1170.5 Part 5: Earthquake actions – New Zealand 

— The Commentary to this Standard is AS/NZS 1170.1 Supp 1, Structural design actions — Permanent, imposed and other actions Commentary (Supplement to AS/NZS 1170.1). 

This Standard is not equivalent to ISO 9194:1987, Bases for design of structures—Actions due to the self-weight of structures, non-structural elements and stored materials—Density. However, it does conform to that Standard (which states ‘Each country in its relevant standards should use its traditional values which are in the indicated range’). Extracts from the data given in ISO 9194 are provided in the Commentary to this Standard. 



This Standard is not equivalent to ISO 2103:1986, Loads due to use and occupancy in residential and public buildings or to ISO 2633:1974, Determination of imposed floor loads in production buildings and warehouses. The philosophy of imposed actions in this Standard is based on ISO 2103 and ISO 2633. ISO 2103 states that the values it gives are the lowest values given in the National Standards that were considered. It is not used in Europe or North America. This Standard gives values that are either equivalent to or greater than those in ISO 2103. This Standard does conform to ISO 2633 for all values except for the distributed load for parking, which is given as 3.0 kPa in ISO 2633. This higher value is not used in Europe or North America. 

This edition incorporates the following principal changes from the previous edition: 

- (a) Dead and live loads for Australia and New Zealand have been included. 

- (b) Load combinations and other general reliability clauses have been removed to the new Standard AS/NZS 1170.0, General principles. 

- (c) The information on movement effects has been included in AS/NZS 1170.0 Supp 1, Commentary on General principles. 

- (d) Permanent and imposed loads from AS 2867, Farm structures—General requirements for structural design, have been included. 

- (e) The provision for occasional loading of 4.5 kN for roof trusses or roof structures in industrial or commercial buildings has been deleted. 

The term ‘normative’ has been used in this Standard to define the application of the appendix to which it applies. A ‘normative’ appendix is an integral part of a Standard. 

Statements expressed in mandatory terms in notes to tables are deemed to be an integral part of this Standard. 

Notes to the text contain information and guidance and are not considered to be an integral part of the Standard. 



## CONTENTS 

||Page|
|---|---|
|SECTION 1 SCOPE AND GENERAL||
|SECTION 2 PERMANENT ACTIONS||
|SECTION 3 IMPOSED ACTIONS||
|3.7|ACTIONS FROM INSTALLED CRANES, HOISTS, LIFTS AND MACHINERY . 15|
|SECTION 4 LIQUID PRESSURE, GROUND WATER, RAINWATER PONDING AND||
|EARTH|PRESSURE|
|APPENDICES||





# STANDARDS AUSTRALIA/STANDARDS NEW ZEALAND 

# Australian/New Zealand Standard 

# Structural design actions 

Part 1:  Permanent, imposed and other actions 


## 1.1   SCOPE 

A2 

This Standard specifies permanent, imposed, static liquid pressure, ground water, rainwater ponding and earth pressure actions to be used in the limit state design of structures and parts of structures. 

## 1.2   APPLICATION 

This Standard shall be read in conjunction with AS/NZS 1170.0. 

This Standard may be used as a means for demonstrating compliance with the Requirements of Part B1 of the Building Code of Australia. 

## 1.3   DETERMINATION OF DESIGN ACTIONS 

For the actions covered by this Standard, values for use in design shall be appropriate for the type of structure or structural element, its intended use and exposure to such actions. 

The determination of values in accordance with Sections 2 to 4 shall be deemed to satisfy this Clause. 

## 1.4   REFERENCED DOCUMENTS 

The following documents are referred to in this Standard: 

AS 

1418 Cranes, hoists and winches (all parts) 1657 Fixed platforms, walkways, stairways and ladders—Design, construction and installation 

1720 Timber structures 1720.2 Part 2: Timber properties 1735 Lifts, escalators and moving walks (all parts) 2156 Walking tracks 2156.1 Part 1: Classification and signage 

AS/NZS 

1170 Structural design actions 1170.0 Part 0: General principles 1170.2 Part 2: Wind actions NZS 4332 Non-domestic passenger lifts and goods lifts 




Australian Building Codes Board 

Building Code of Australia 

## 1.5   DEFINITIONS 

For the purpose of this Standard, the definitions given in AS/NZS 1170.0 and those below apply. 

## 1.5.1   Imposed action 

A variable action resulting from the intended use or occupancy of the structure. 

## 1.5.2   Load 

The value of a force appropriate to an action. 

## 1.5.3   Permanent action 

Action that is likely to act continuously throughout the design working life and for which variations in magnitude with time are small compared with the mean value. 

## 1.5.4   Design working life 

Assumed period for which a structure or a structural element is to be used for its intended purpose without major repair being necessary. 

## 1.5.5   Tributary area 

The area assumed to be supported by a structural element. 

## 1.5.6   Variable action 

Action for which the variation in magnitude with time is neither negligible in relation to the mean value nor monotonic. 

## 1.6   NOTATION 

Unless otherwise stated, the notation used in this Standard has the following meaning: 

- A = tributary area supported by a structural element 

- Fe,u = earth pressure action 

- Fgw = ground water action 

- Flp = liquid pressure action 




- ψa = factor for reduction of imposed floor loads due to area 

- ψl = factor for determining quasi-permanent values (long-term) of actions (see AS/NZS 1170.0) 





## 2.1   GENERAL 

This Section gives permanent actions (G) for use in designing structures. 

Permanent actions shall be taken to include the self-weight of the following: 

- (a) The structure. 

- (b) All other materials incorporated into the structure. 

   - NOTE: This includes walls, floors, roofs, suspended ceilings and other permanent construction, as appropriate. 

- (c) Permanent equipment including fixtures and fittings. 

   - NOTE: This includes permanently fixed wiring, reticulated services and other permanent equipment as appropriate. 

- (d) Partitions as given in Clause 2.3. 

- (e) Stored materials where the resultant actions are consistent with the definition for permanent action. 

## 2.2   CALCULATION OF SELF-WEIGHT 

The self-weight of a material shall be calculated from the design dimensions or known dimensions and the unit weight as given in Appendix A. 

NOTE: Further information on unit weights of materials is given in AS/NZS 1170.1 Supp 1, Structural design actions—Permanent, imposed and other actions—Commentary (Supplement to AS/NZS 1170.1:2002). 

## 2.3   PROVISION FOR PARTITIONS 

The self-weight of permanent partitions shall be calculated for their actual layout. 

Structures for which provision is to be made for movable partitions shall be designed for the anticipated weight of the partitions placed in any probable positions but not less than a uniformly distributed permanent load of 0.5 kPa over the area being considered. 

## 2.4   REMOVABLE ITEMS 

Consideration shall be given to the actions resulting from the effect of removing those permanent items that are not essential parts of the structure, such as tanks or their contents, stored materials as defined in Clause 2.1(e), service equipment, partitions and similar. 





## 3.1   GENERAL 

This Section gives imposed actions (Q) for use in designing structures. The values of imposed actions provided in this Section are appropriate for use with all of the annual probabilities of exceedance defined in AS/NZS 1170.0. 

Actions resulting from construction are not covered in this Standard. 

The imposed actions shall be not less than the greater of the following: 

- (a) The actions resulting from the intended use of the structure. 

- (b) The imposed actions given in this Section. NOTE: The imposed actions given in this Section include sufficient allowance for the effects of vertical impact arising from the usual movement of people and shifting of furniture. This allowance does not cover dynamic effects due to highly active crowds. Dynamic effects due to vibrating machinery are covered separately in Clause 3.7. 

The distributed and concentrated imposed loads shall be considered separately and design carried out for the most adverse effect. 

## 3.2   CONCENTRATED ACTIONS 

A concentrated imposed action shall be applied as follows: 

- (a) At its known position or where its position is not known, in the position giving the most adverse effect. 

- (b) Distributed over the actual area of application or if the actual area is not known or otherwise stipulated in Tables 3.1 or 3.2, over an area of not greater than 0.01 m[2] for floors and roofs. 

## 3.3   PARTIAL LOAD 

The imposed action shall be considered to be absent from any parts of a structure if its absence will cause more adverse effects on that or any other part. For floor loads, the intensity of the imposed load shall be appropriate to the loaded portion of the area under consideration (see Clause 3.4.2). 

For design situations involving wind, earthquake or fire emergency conditions, partial loading of alternate spans of continuous beams or slabs need not be considered. 

For partial loading on continuous beams, the span (or two adjacent spans) that contains the effect under consideration shall be loaded with an imposed load intensity, as determined from Clause 3.4.2, appropriate to the tributary area supported by the span (or spans). Other spans that are required to be loaded to cause the most adverse effect shall be assumed to be loaded with a load intensity appropriate to the span multiplied by the long-term factor (ψl) given in AS/NZS 1170.0. 

## 3.4   FLOORS 

## 3.4.1   Imposed floor actions 

The imposed actions (Q) appropriate to the type of activity or occupancy for which the floor area will be used shall be the reference values given in Table 3.1 and Appendix B multiplied by the reduction factor given in Clause 3.4.2. 




Areas in residential, social, commercial, industrial and administration structures are divided into seven categories, according to their type of activity or occupancy, as shown in Column 1 of Table 3.1. 

NOTE: The philosophy of the Table is that each area of a floor is associated with one of the activity types. Thus in order to classify an area under consideration, the design must consider the type of activities that occur in that area. 

## TABLE   3.1 

## REFERENCE VALUES OF IMPOSED FLOOR ACTIONS 

A2 

|Type of activity/occupancy<br>for part of the building or<br>structure|<br>Specific uses|Uniformly<br>distributed actions<br>kPa|Concentrated<br>actions<br>kN|
|---|---|---|---|
|A Domestic and residential activities<br>(also see Category C)||||
|A1<br>Self-contained<br>dwellings|General areas, private kitchens and<br>laundries in self-contained dwellings|1.5|1.8(1)|
||Balconies, and roofs used for floor type<br>activities, in self-contained dwellings—<br>(a) less than 1 m above ground level<br>(b)other|1.5<br>2.0|1.5 kN/m run<br>along edge<br>1.8(1)|
||Stairs(2)and landings in self-contained<br>dwellings|2.0|2.7|
||Non-habitable roof spaces in self-<br>contained dwellings|0.5|1.4(8)|
|A2<br>Other|General areas, bedrooms, hospital wards,<br>hotel rooms,toilet areas|2.0|1.8(1)|
||Communal kitchens|3.0|2.7|
||Balconies, and roofs used for floor type<br>activities, with community access|same as areas<br>providing access but<br>not less than 4.0|1.8|
|B<br>Offices and work<br>areas not covered<br>elsewhere|Operating theatres, X-ray rooms, utility<br>rooms|3.0|4.5|
||Work rooms (light industrial) without<br>storage|3.0|3.5|
||Offices forgeneral use|3.0|2.7(3)|
||Communal kitchens|3.0|2.7|
||Commercial/institutional kitchens|5.0|4.5|
||Laundries|3.0|4.5|
||Laboratories|3.0|4.5|
||Factories, workshops and similar<br>buildings(general industrial)|5.0|4.5|
||Balconies, and roofs used for floor type<br>activities|same as areas<br>providing access but<br>not less than 4.0|1.8|
||Fly galleries (in theatres, etc.)|4.5 kN/m run<br>uniformly distributed<br>over the width|—|
||Grids (over the area of proscenium width<br>by stage depth)|2.8|—|
||(continued)|||






TABLE   3.1   (continued) 

||TABLE   3.1(continued)|||
|---|---|---|---|
|Type of activity/occupancy<br>for part of the building or<br>structure|<br>Specific uses|Uniformly<br>distributed actions<br>kPa|Concentrated<br>actions<br>kN|
|C Areas where people<br>may congregate||||
|C1<br>Areas with tables|Public, institutional and communal dining<br>rooms and lounges, cafes and<br>restaurants(5)|2.0|2.7|
||Readingrooms with no book storage|2.5|4.5|
||Classrooms|3.0|2.7|
|C2<br>Areas with fixed<br>seats(6)|Institutional assembly areas such as<br>classrooms,lecture theatres and similar|3.0|2.7|
||Public assembly areas such as public<br>halls, theatres, courts of law, auditoria,<br>conference centres and similar|4.0|2.7|
||Places of worship|4.0|2.7|
|C3<br>Areas without<br>obstacles for moving<br>people|Corridors, hallways, aisles, stairs(2),<br>landings(2), concourses, terraces, plazas,<br>etc.,not subject to wheeled vehicles|4.0|4.5|
||Corridors, hallways, aisles, stairs(2),<br>landings(2), etc. subject to wheeled<br>vehicles,trolleys,etc.|5.0|4.5|
||Footpaths, terraces and plazas at ground<br>level  subject to wheeled vehicles|5.0|31(4)|
||Museum floors and art galleries for<br>exhibitionpurposes|4.0|4.5|
||Balconies, and roofs used for floor type<br>activities|same as areas<br>providing access but<br>not less than 4.0|1.8|
|C4<br>Areas with possible<br>physical activities<br>(see Note to<br>Clause 3.1(b))|Dance halls and studios, gymnasia|5.0|3.6|
||Drill halls and drill rooms|5.0|9.0|
|C5<br>Areas susceptible to<br>overcrowding (see<br>Note to<br>Clause 3.1(b))|Assembly areas without fixed seating<br>(concert halls, bars, vestibules, public<br>lounges, places of worship, shopping<br>malls)andgrandstands|5.0|3.6|
||Stages inpublic assemblyareas|7.5|4.5|
|D<br>Shopping areas|Shop floors for the sale and display of<br>merchandise|4.0|3.6|



(continued) 




TABLE   3.1   (continued) 

||TABLE   3.1(continued)|||
|---|---|---|---|
|Type of activity/occupancy<br>for part of the building or<br>structure|<br>Specific uses|Uniformly<br>distributed actions<br>kPa|Concentrated<br>actions<br>kN|
|E Warehousing and<br>storage areas. Areas<br>subject to<br>accumulation of<br>goods. Areas for<br>equipment and plant|Reading rooms with book storage, e.g.<br>libraries<br>General storage other than those specified|4.0<br> 2.4 for each metre of<br>storage height|4.5<br>7.0|
||Free rolling office compactus, for general<br>filing,upto 2 m high|3.0 for each metre of<br>storage height|to be<br>calculated|
||File rooms, office storage space, vaults<br>and strongrooms|5.0|4.5|
||Stack rooms (books)|3.3 for each metre in<br>storage height|7.0|
||Paper storage for printing plants and<br>stationerystores, packed book storage|4.0 for each metre of<br>storage height|9.0|
||Mobile stacking, mechanically operated<br>heavy shelving (wheels on rails, e.g.<br>compactus)|4.0 for each metre of<br>storage height but not<br>less than 10.0|to be<br>calculated|
||Cold storage|4.5 for each metre of<br>storage height but<br>with a minimum of<br>15.0|9.0|
||Plant rooms, fan rooms, etc., including<br>weight of machinery|5.0|4.5|
||Areas around equipment in boiler rooms<br>(weight of equipment to be determined)|5.0|4.5|
|F<br>Light vehicle traffic<br>areas|Parking, garages, driveways and ramps<br>restricted to cars, light vans, etc., not<br>exceeding2500 kg gross mass.|2.5|13(7)|
|G Medium vehicle<br>traffic areas|Vehicles exceeding 2500 kg and not<br>exceeding 10 000 kg. Driveways, ramps,<br>repair workshops, footpaths with vehicle<br>access, and car parking|5.0|31(4)|



## NOTES: 

- 1 The concentrated load shall be applied over an area of 350 mm2 for calculation of punching or crushing. 

- 2 Where a stair tread or landing is structurally independent of the adjoining elements, it shall be capable of withstanding a line load of 2.2 kN/m of span of tread or landing. 

- 3 A concentrated load of 6.7 kN shall be used where a general allowance for safes is made. 

- 4 The concentrated load shall be applied over an area of 0.025 m2 for calculation of punching or crushing. 

- 5 Where these same areas may be subjected to loads due to physical activities or overcrowding (for example a hotel dining room used as a dance floor), imposed loads shall be based on occupancy C4 or C5, as appropriate. 

- 6 Fixed seating is seating where the removal of the seating and the use of the space for other purposes is not likely. 

- 7 For domestic garages with timber floors, this may be reduced to 9 kN applied over an area of 0.3 m × 0.3 m. 

- 8 This is for situations where floor sheeting is installed in ceiling spaces to strengthen the structure of a house for earthquake action (sometimes done in New Zealand). 

A2 




## 3.4.2   Reduction of uniformly distribution imposed actions 

The reduction factor (ψa) shall be as follows: 

- (a) ψa = 1.0 for the following: 

   - (i) Areas covered by activity or occupancy types C3, C4 and C5 (see Table 3.1). 

   - (ii) Storage areas on which imposed floor actions exceed 5 kPa. 

   - (iii) Light and medium traffic areas (activity or occupancy types F and G). 

   - (iv) Imposed actions from machinery and equipment for which specific design allowance has been made. 

   - (v) One-way slabs. 

- 3 

- (b) ψa = 0.3 + but not greater than 1.0 and not less than 0.5. A 

where 

- A = sum of all areas supported by a structural element, in square metre, for which reduction is not restricted under Clause 3.4.2(a) 

## 3.5   ROOF AND SUPPORTING ELEMENTS 

## 3.5.1   Roofs 

Values for the imposed actions appropriate to roofs shall be as given in Table 3.2 except that roofs used for floor type activities (including activity types A, B, C, D, E, F and G) are treated as floors and values shall be as given in Table 3.1. 

Roofs not accessible except for normal maintenance, repair, painting and minor repairs are divided into the following categories: 

- (a) R1—Street awnings or roof areas where it is practical for limited numbers of people to gain access either from adjacent openable windows, awnings, balconies or roofs or from the ground only. 

- (b) R2—Other roofs, either flat or pitched as follows: 

   - (i) Structural elements supporting the cladding. 

   - (ii) Roof cladding inclusive of any associated protective mesh, or similar, which is required to support actions incidental to maintenance. 

   - (iii) Surfaces (including transparent surfaces) over which supports (e.g., boards or ladders) are required to be laid to support actions incidental to maintenance (e.g., people). 




## TABLE   3.2 

## REFERENCE VALUES OF ROOF ACTIONS 

A2 

|Type of activity/occupancy<br>for part of the building or<br>structure|Specific uses|Uniformly<br>distributed actions<br>kPa|Concentrated<br>actions<br>kN|
|---|---|---|---|
|R1  Street awnings<br>(including cladding)|Accessible from adjacent windows,<br>roofs or balconies|1.5|1.8|
||Accessible only from ground level|1.0|1.8|
|R2  Other roofs|(i) Structural elements<br>(ii) Cladding providing direct support <br>(iii) Surfaces over which boards or<br>ladders are required to be laid|(1.8/A+ 0.12) but not<br>less than 0.25<br>(see Notes 1, 2 and 3)<br> As for structural<br>elements<br>—|1.4<br>(see Note 3)<br>1.1<br>0.5|



NOTES: 

- 1 Structural elements supporting more than 200 m[2] of roof area shall be designed to support 0.25 kPa on the 200 m[2] of the supported area that gives the worst effect. 

- 2 A = the plan projection of the surface area of roof supported by the member under analysis, in square metres. 

A2 

- 3 For structural elements in roofs of houses, the uniform distributed actions shall be 0.25 kPa and the concentrated actions shall be 1.1 kN. 

## 3.5.2   Roof trusses, ceilings, skylights and similar structures 

Where the bottom chords of roof trusses, joists and hangers for ceilings, ribs of skylights, frames and coverings of ceiling access hatches and any similar structure are required to support the force imposed by a person for any purpose, they shall be designed to support a 1.4 kN concentrated load. 

Where the structural element is not required to support a person before the cladding is in place, and there is headroom of less than 1.2 m after installation of the cladding, the concentrated action may be reduced to 0.9 kN. 

NOTE: This Standard no longer includes the 4.5 kN occasional load on exposed trusses and beams (for industrial, commercial and farm buildings) that was required in AS 1170.1—1989. If provision for such loads is required, the loads should be given in the specification for the building. 

## 3.6   BARRIERS 

Barriers, including parapets, balustrades and railings, together with members and connections that provide structural support, shall be designed to sustain the imposed actions given in Table 3.3. The top edge or handrail shall also be designed for the case where a concentrated load of 0.6 kN, positioned for the worst effect, acts inward, outward or downward. 

The uniformly distributed line load and the uniformly distributed and concentrated loads applicable to the infill are not additive. They shall be considered as three separate load cases. 

Actions due to wind or earthquake need not be assumed to act concurrently with the loads given in Table 3.3. 

NOTE: For design of barriers for wind effects, information is given in AS/NZS 1170.2. 




## TABLE   3.3 

## MINIMUM IMPOSED ACTIONS FOR BARRIERS 

|A2<br>A2|Type of occupancy for part<br>of the building or structure|Specific uses|Top edge|Top edge|Top edge|Infill|Infill|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||||Horizontal<br>kN/m|Vertical<br>kN/m|Inwards,<br>outwards or<br>downwards<br>kN|Horizontal<br>kPa|Any<br>direction<br>(see<br>Note 2)<br>kN|
||A<br>Domestic and<br>residential activities|All areas within or<br>serving exclusively one<br>dwelling including stairs,<br>landings, etc. but<br>excluding external<br>balconies and edges of<br>roofs (see C3)|0.35|0.35|0.6|0.5|0.25|
|||Other residential, (see<br>also C)|0.75|0.75|0.6|1.0|0.5|
||B, E<br>Offices and work<br>areas not included<br>elsewhere including<br>storage areas|Light access stairs and<br>gangways not more than<br>600 mm wide|0.22|0.22|0.6|N/A|N/A|
|||Fixed platforms,<br>walkways, stairways and<br>ladders for access (see<br>Note 1)|0.35|0.35|0.6|N/A|N/A|
|||Areas not susceptible to<br>overcrowding in office<br>and institutional<br>buildings also industrial<br>and storage buildings|0.75|0.75|0.6|1.0|0.5|
||C<br>Areas where people<br>may congregate|||||||
||C1/C2<br>Areas with tables or<br>fixed seating|Areas with fixed seating<br>adjacent to a balustrade,<br>restaurants, bars, etc.|1.5|0.75|0.6|1.5|1.5|
||C3<br>Areas without<br>obstacles for<br>moving people and<br>not susceptible to<br>over-crowding|Stairs, landings, external<br>balconies, edges of roofs,<br>etc.|0.75|0.75|0.6|1.0|0.5|
||C5<br>Areas susceptible to<br>over-crowding|Theatres, cinemas,<br>grandstands,<br>discotheques, bars,<br>auditoria, shopping malls<br>(see also D), assembly<br>areas, studios, etc.|3.0|0.75|0.6|1.5|1.5|
||D<br>Retail areas|All retail areas including<br>public areas of<br>banks/building societies,<br>(see C5 for areas where<br>overcrowding may occur)|1.5|0.75|0.6|1.5|1.5|



(continued) 




A2 

## TABLE   3.3   (continued) 

|Type of occupancy for part<br>of the building or structure|Specific uses|Top edge|Top edge|Top edge|Infill|Infill|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|||Horizontal<br>kN/m|Vertical<br>kN/m|Inwards,<br>outwards or<br>downwards<br>kN|Horizontal<br>kPa|Any<br>direction<br>(see<br>Note 2)<br>kN|
|F/G<br>Vehicular|Pedestrian areas in car<br>parks including stairs,<br>landings, ramps, edges of<br>internal floors, footways,<br>edges of roofs|1.5|0.75|0.6|1.5|1.5|
||Horizontal loads imposed<br>by vehicles|See Clause 3.8|||||



NOTES: 

- 1 This usage (under B, E) is for access to and safe working at places normally used by operating, inspection, maintenance and servicing personnel. 

- 2 Applied over a panel of 2000 mm[2] or over two adjacent vertical balustrades, as appropriate. 

## 3.7   ACTIONS FROM INSTALLED CRANES, HOISTS, LIFTS AND MACHINERY 

## 3.7.1   General 

Actions resulting from acceleration of masses in installed cranes, hoists, lifts and other machinery shall be treated as additional imposed loads. 

The imposed loads used for the design of structures supporting such loads shall be— 

- (a) provided by the manufacturer of that machinery based on an appropriate dynamic assessment; or 

- (b) derived from AS 1418, AS 1735 or NZS 4332, as applicable. 

In the absence of such information, the factors given in Clauses 3.7.2 and 3.7.3 shall be used. 

## 3.7.2   Vertical actions 

For the design of elements supporting lifts, cranes and machinery, the static vertical actions and their appropriate dynamic factors shall be as given in Table 3.4. 

TABLE   3.4 

## DYNAMIC FACTORS FOR VERTICAL ACTIONS 

|Machinery|Dynamic factor|Element being designed|Action being considered|
|---|---|---|---|
|Lifts|2.0|Supports|Weight of moving<br>components|
|Travelling cranes:<br>Electric overhead cranes<br>Hand-operated cranes|1.25<br>1.1|Gantry girders and their<br>connections|Static wheel loads|
|Non-reciprocating machinery<br>(e.g., light machinery, shaft or<br>motor driven)|1.2|Supports|Weight of the machinery|
|Reciprocating machinery (e.g.,<br>compressors) or power-driven<br>units (e.g., piston engines)|1.5|Supports|Weight of the machinery|






## 3.7.3   Horizontal actions on crane rails 

## 3.7.3.1    General 

The horizontal imposed actions specified in Clauses 3.7.3.2 and 3.7.3.3 shall be considered as acting at the rail head level, acting together. 

Gantry girders and their vertical supports shall be designed on the basis that either of the horizontal imposed actions specified in Clauses 3.7.3.2 or 3.7.3.3 can act at the same time as the vertical load given in Clause 3.7.2. 

## 3.7.3.2   Transverse to rails 

The horizontal imposed actions, acting transverse to crane rails shall be taken as the static wheel load resulting from the combined weight of the crab and the load lifted, multiplied by the following factors: 



## 3.7.3.3   Parallel to rails 

Horizontal imposed actions acting along the rails shall be taken as the static wheel loads that can occur on the rails, multiplied by the following factors: 



## 3.7.3.4   Buffer actions 

The loads applied to the structure shall be calculated in accordance with AS 1418. 

## 3.8   CAR PARKS 

Braking and horizontal impact forces arising from the movement of vehicles shall be treated as additional imposed actions. The imposed braking action shall be half the static load imposed by the gross mass of the vehicle. 

The horizontal imposed action on barriers required to withstand the accidental impact from vehicles during parking shall be taken as follows: 

- (a) For light traffic areas (Type F as given in Table 3.1): 




The impact force shall be distributed over a 1.5 m length at any position along the barrier and shall be assumed to act at 0.5 m above floor level for light traffic areas and at 1.0 m for medium traffic areas. 

NOTE: Guidance for situations not covered in this Clause is given in AS/NZS 1170.1 Supp 1, Structural design actions—Permanent, imposed and other actions—Commentary (Supplement to AS/NZS 1170.1:2002). 




## 3.9   GRANDSTANDS 

Grandstands, stadiums, assembly platforms, reviewing stands, and similar, shall be designed to withstand horizontal imposed actions, in addition to the imposed actions given in Clause 3.4. Horizontal imposed actions due to crowd movement shall be taken as follows: 

- (a) For platforms with seats, the following separate load cases (not applied simultaneously), applied at floor level at each row of seats— 

   - (i) 350 N per linear metre of seating along the line of the seats; and 

   - (ii) 150 N per linear metre of seating perpendicular to the line of the seats. 

- (b) For platforms without seats 250 N per square metre of plan area (0.25 kPa). 

The imposed actions of this Clause need not be applied simultaneously to the required earthquake action. 





## 4.1   GENERAL 

This Section gives methods for calculating the action of liquids, ground water, rainwater ponding and retained earth for use in designed structures. 

## 4.2   LIQUID PRESSURE 

The action resulting from static liquid pressure (Flp) shall be calculated from the depth of the liquid and the unit weight of the liquid. 

## 4.3   GROUND WATER 

The action resulting from hydrostatic pressure of water acting on surfaces below ground level (Fgw) shall be the value assuming the water level is at ground level or, where information is available, the ground water level with an annual probability of exceedance of 1 in 50. 

## 4.4   RAINWATER PONDING 

The action resulting from rainwater ponding (Fpnd) shall be calculated from the expected ponding and from the quantity of water that can collect when primary drainage does not function. Both long-term and short-term sag of areas where water may pond shall be taken into account. 

## 4.5   EARTH PRESSURE 

Earth pressure actions (Fe,u) resulting in lateral loads on earth-retaining structures shall be determined using established methods of soil mechanics. 




## APPENDIX   A 

## UNIT WEIGHTS OF MATERIALS 

(Normative) 

This Appendix gives unit weights of materials for use in calculating self-weight of parts of structures and stored materials. 

NOTE: Further information on unit weights of materials is given in AS/NZS 1170.1 Supp 1, Structural design actions—Permanent, imposed and other actions—Commentary (Supplement to AS/NZS 1170.1:2002). 

A2 

## TABLE   A1 

## UNIT WEIGHTS OF MATERIALS AND CONSTRUCTION 

|Material|Weight per cubic metre<br>kN/m3|
|---|---|
|Aluminium<br>Asphalt<br>Bitumen<br>Brass<br>Concrete, dense aggregate, unreinforced<br>(add 0.6 for each 1% by volume of steel reinforcement<br>Copper<br>Cork<br>—normal<br>—compressed<br>Fibre cement sheet<br>—uncompressed<br>—compressed<br>—fire-resistant lining sheet<br>—insulating sheet<br>Glass—window (soda-lime)<br>Granite, basalt, trachyte<br>Iron, cast<br>Lead<br>Limestone<br>—dense<br>—Mt. Gambier<br>Marble<br>Paper—copy paper—boxed<br>Sand (dense and wet)<br>Sandstone<br>Steel<br>Timbers, at 12% moisture content (see also AS 1720.2)<br>Pine (Radiata)<br>Cypress<br>(Australian<br>(New Zealand)<br>(Australian)<br>Douglas fir<br>Hoop<br>Blackbutt|26.7<br>21.2<br>10 to 14<br>83.5<br>24.0<br>86.3<br>1.7<br>3.7<br>14.2<br>17.2<br>9.1<br>6.9<br>25.5<br>26.4<br>70.7<br>111<br>24.5<br>12.5<br>26.4<br>6.9<br>20.0<br>22.5<br>76.9<br>5.3<br>4.6<br>7.0<br>5.5<br>5.3<br>8.7|
|Grey gum<br>Grey ironbark<br>Jarrah<br>10.6<br>11<br>8||
|(continued)||






A2 

|Material|Weight per cubic metre<br>kN/m3|
|---|---|
|Spotted gum<br>Tallowwood<br>Turpentine<br>White mahogany<br>Vic ash<br>Zinc|10<br>10<br>9.5<br>9.5<br>6.3<br>70.0|



## TABLE   A2 

## BUILDING MATERIALS AND CONSTRUCTION 

|Material or construction|Force/unit area<br>kN/m2|
|---|---|
|Ceilings<br>Fibrous plaster, 10 mm thick<br>Gypsum plaster, 13 mm thick<br>Lime plaster, 13 mm thick<br>Portland cement plaster, 13 mm thick<br>Suspended metal lath and gypsum plaster<br>FRL—1 h<br>FRL—2 h<br>No fire rate|0.09<br>0.13<br>0.24<br>0.29<br>0.25<br>0.50<br>0.15|
|Floors<br>Asphalt, 25 mm thick<br>Cinder-concrete filling, 25 mm thick<br>Clay tiling, 13 mm thick<br>Compressed fibre cement sheet, 15 mm thick<br>Magnesium oxychloride—<br>normal (sawdust filler), 25 mm thick<br>heavy duty (mineral filler), 25 mm thick<br>Terrazzo paving, 16 mm thick|0.53<br>0.43<br>0.27<br>0.23<br>0.35<br>0.53<br>0.43|
|Roofs<br>Fibre cement, corrugated sheeting—<br>6 mm thick, (standard corrugations)<br>6 mm thick, incl. lap and fastenings<br>6 mm thick, (deep corrugations)<br>6 mm thick, incl. lap and fastenings<br>Fibre-cement shingles<br>Bituminous felt (5-ply) and gravel<br>Metal, troughed sheeting other than given elsewhere<br>Acrylic resin sheet, corrugated—<br>3 mm thick, standard corrugations<br>3 mm thick, deep corrugations<br>Slates—10 mm thick<br>Steel sheet, flat galvanized, per mm thickness|0.11<br>0.13<br>0.12<br>0.16<br>0.22<br>0.43<br>Actual mass to be<br>determined<br>0.04<br>0.06<br>0.70<br>0.08|



(continued) 





A2 

A2 

|TABLE   A2(continued)||
|---|---|
|Material or construction|Force/unit area<br>kN/m2|
|Steel, galvanized standard corrugated sheeting—<br>1.00 mm, incl. lap and fastenings<br>0.80 mm, incl. lap and fastenings<br>0.60 mm, incl. lap and fastenings<br>0.50 mm, incl. lap and fastenings<br>Tiles—<br>Terracotta (French pattern)<br>Concrete<br>Zinc sheet per 10 mm thick|0.12<br>0.10<br>0.08<br>0.05<br>0.57<br>0.53<br>0.76|
|Walls and partitions(see Note 1)<br>Acrylic resin sheet, flat, per 1.0 mm of thickness<br>Autoclaved aerated concrete block masonry—100 mm<br>thick<br>Fibre cement sheet—<br>4.5 mm thick<br>6.0 mm thick<br>Fibre-cement compressed decking 15 mm thick<br>Fibre-cement sheet—fire resistant<br>lining sheet, 9 mm thick<br>insulating sheet, 15 mm thick<br>Brick masonry, solid—<br>burnt clay, per 10 mm of thickness<br>calcium silicate (sand-lime), per 10 mm of thickness<br>Concrete hollow block masonry (see Note 2)—<br>Standard aggregate:<br>90 mm thick<br>140 mm thick<br>190 mm thick<br>Lightweight aggregate:<br>90 mm thick<br>140 mm thick<br>190 mm thick<br>Fibre insulation board, per 100 mm of thickness<br>(see Note 3)<br>Fibrous plaster board, per 100 mm of thickness<br>Hardboard, per 100 mm of thickness<br>Particle or flakeboard, per 100 mm of thickness<br>Plaster board, per 100 mm of thickness<br>Plaster<br>Portland cement, per 10 mm of thickness<br>Lime, per 10 mm of thickness<br>Gypsum, per 10 mm of thickness<br>Plywood, per 10 mm of thickness|0.01<br>0.50 to 0.65<br>0.07<br>0.11<br>0.26<br>0.08<br>0.10<br>0.19<br>0.18<br>1.45<br>1.83<br>2.10<br>1.20<br>1.51<br>1.82<br>0.34<br>0.92<br>0.96<br>0.66<br>0.76<br>0.23<br>0.19<br>0.17<br>0.04 to 0.12|



NOTES: 

- 1 Mass of masonry includes mass of mortar but not mass of render or plaster, or mass of absorbed rainwater. 

- 2 For mass of fire-rated masonry refer to manufacturer. 

- 3 For most of the boards, values in Column 2 are given only for the given thickness of board. For other thicknesses, proportional values may be taken. 




## APPENDIX   B 

## OTHER IMPOSED ACTIONS 

(Normative) 

This Appendix gives values of imposed actions for some other specific uses. For all the specific uses given in this Appendix, the reduction factor (ψa) shall be taken as 1.0. Table B1 includes values for the following: 

- (a) Non-habitable structures exposed to the weather in areas that are— 

      - (i) isolated from vehicular access (accessible only by foot over considerable distances); or 

      - (ii) remote (accessible only by foot where people will have to walk more than 2 days or traverse difficult terrain). 

- (b) Farm structures (see Notes 1 and 2) that are— 

      - (i) of non-residential occupancy with not more than one person per 30m[2] during normal use; 

      - (ii) associated with and located on land devoted to the practice of farming; and 

   - (iii) used essentially for housing equipment or livestock or for production, storage or processing of produce. 

   - NOTES: 

   - 1 Examples include hay sheds, implement sheds, grain and fertilizer stores, coolstores for fruit and vegetables, piggeries, poultry sheds, shearing sheds, farm dairies (milking sheds), greenhouses, farm workshops, fruit packing sheds, egg grading rooms, tobacco curing sheds and garages not attached to the farm residence. 

   - 2 Loads due to silos and bunkers are not covered in this Standard. 

For the design of walking track structures as defined in AS 2156.1, structures in walking track classifications 3 and 4 shall be designed using the values for isolated structures and in walking track classification 5 using the values for remote structures. 




## TABLE   B1 

## OTHER IMPOSED ACTIONS 

|A2|Specific use|Uniformly distributed<br>load<br>kPa|Concentrated<br>load(s)<br>kN|
|---|---|---|---|
||FARM STRUCTURES<br>All floors and platforms where a person may stand<br>Steps or rungs where a person may stand<br>Greenhouses<br>Floors for farm animals (machinery and equipment loads must<br>be added):<br>Sheep<br>Pigs—<br>to 25 kg<br>to 90 kg<br>to 180 kg<br>to 225 kg<br>Dairy cattle—Stall area<br>Poultry—Floor houses<br>Beef cattle—<br>calves to 135 kg<br>mature animals<br>Horses<br>Farm machinery—<br>normal<br>heavy (vehicles more than 6 t, or loaded farm trailers)<br>Farm sheds for storage (or calculated load if higher)|As appropriate<br>—<br>2.5<br>2.0<br>1.5<br>2.5<br>3.0<br>3.5<br>3.0<br>1.0<br>2.5<br>5.0<br>5.0<br>7<br>10<br>5|1.1<br>1.1<br>25 on 0.56 m2|
||WALKING TRACK STRUCTURES (for Australia only)<br>Platforms, walkways, stairs and fixed ladders for human use<br>exposed to the weather—<br>(a)<br>viewing platforms (subject to groups of people)—<br>isolated<br>remote<br>(b)<br>accessways—<br>isolated<br>remote<br>Stairways<br>Ladders (fixed)<br>Wire crossings|4.0<br>3.0<br>3.0<br>2.0<br>2.2 kN per metre of step<br>—<br>1.0 kN per metre of wire|1.4(1)<br>1.4(1)<br>1.4(1)<br>1.4(1)<br>1.8(1)<br>1.4(1)<br>1.4|
||STRUCTURES FOR ACCESS AND WORKING<br>(as described in AS 1657) (See Note 2))<br>Floors<br>Stairs<br>Treads<br>(individual)<br>Ladders  (single load or a number of loads depending on the<br>number of people to use the ladder at any one time)|2.5<br>2.5<br>2.2 kN/m<br>of tread|1.1<br>1<br>1|
||(continued)|||







|TABLE   B1(contin|ued)||
|---|---|---|
|Specific use|Uniformly distributed<br>load<br>kPa|Concentrated<br>load(s)<br>kN|
|OTHER LOADS<br>Catwalks<br>Timber pallets, single layer, with—<br>lamb carcases<br>mutton carcases<br>beef in cartons<br>stacked timber pallets (per pallet)|—<br>8.7<br>8.7<br>14.1<br>7.2|1.1 at 1.2 m<br>centres|



NOTES: 

1 The concentrated load shall be applied over an area of 350 mm[2] for calculation of punching or crushing. 

2 AS 1657 covers fixed platforms, walkways stairways and ladders for access to and working at places normally used by operating, inspection, maintenance and servicing personnel. 



## AMENDMENT CONTROL SHEET 

## AS/NZS 1170.1:2002 

Amendment No. 1 (2005) 

## CORRECTION 

SUMMARY: This Amendment applies to the Preface. Published on 28 April 2005. 

Amendment No. 2 (2009) 

## CORRECTION 

SUMMARY: This Amendment applies to the Clause 1.1, Tables 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, and Appendices A and B. Published on 21 January 2009. 


NOTES 


NOTES 


NOTES 

## Standards New Zealand 

The first national Standards organization was created in New Zealand in 1932. The Standards Council of New Zealand is the national authority responsible for the production of Standards. Standards New Zealand is the trading arm of the Standards Council established under the Standards Act 1988. 

## Australian/New Zealand Standards 

Under a Memorandum of Understanding between Standards Australia and Standards New Zealand, Australian/New Zealand Standards are prepared by committees of experts from industry, governments, consumers and other sectors. The requirements or recommendations contained in published Standards are a consensus of the views of representative interests and also take account of comments received from other sources. They reflect the latest scientific and industry experience. Australian/New Zealand Standards are kept under continuous review after publication and are updated regularly to take account of changing technology. 

## International Involvement 

Standards Australia and Standards New Zealand are responsible for ensuring that the Australian and New Zealand viewpoints are considered in the formulation of international Standards and that the latest international experience is incorporated in national and Joint Standards. This role is vital in assisting local industry to compete in international markets. Both organizations are the national members of ISO (the International Organization for Standardization) and IEC (the International Electrotechnical Commission). 

## Visit our web sites 

www.standards.org.au www.standards.co.nz 



GPO Box 476 Sydney  NSW  2001 Phone (02) 9237 6000 Fax (02) 9237 6010 Email mail@standards.org.au Internet www.standards.org.au SAI Global Customer Service Phone 13 12 42 Fax 1300 65 49 49 Email sales@sai-global.com 

Level 10 Radio New Zealand House 155 The Terrace Wellington 6001 (Private Bag 2439 Wellington 6020) Phone (04) 498 5990 Fax (04) 498 5994 Customer Services (04) 498 5991 Information Service (04) 498 5992 Email snz@standards.co.nz Internet www.standards.co.nz 


Printed in Australia 

