

## **Australian/New Zealand Standard[™]** 




## **AS/NZS 2699.1:2000** 




## **Keeping Standards up-to-date** 






## **AS/NZS 2699.1:2000** 




## **Keeping Standards up-to-date** 







## **Australian/New Zealand Standard™** 

# **Built-in components for masonry construction** 



## **COPYRIGHT** 

- **© Standards Australia/Standards New Zealand** 





## **PREFACE** 






- **(a) resistance to water transfer;** 

- **(b) characteristic strength and stiffness; and** 

- **(c) corrosion resistance.** 






## CONTENTS 

||CONTENTS|||
|---|---|---|---|
|||Page||
|SECTION 1 GENERAL||||
|SECTION 2 PERFORMANCE CRITERIA||||
|SECTION 3 DEEMED-TO-COMPLY PROVISIONS FOR MATERIAL SELECTION|||12|
|SECTION 4 IDENTIFICATION MARKS||||
|SECTION 5 ASSESSMENT FOR COMPLIANCE WITH THIS STANDARD||||
|APPENDICES||||
|A|METHOD FOR DETERMINING THE STIFFNESS AND STRENGTH OF|||
|B|METHOD FOR THE DETERMINATION OF THE STRENGTH OF|||
|C|METHOD FOR DETERMINING THE DURABILITY CLASSIFICATION OF|||
|D|METHOD FOR DETERMINING THE DURABILITY CLASSIFICATION|||
||OF STEEL WALL TIES WITH AN ORGANIC OR DUPLEX COATING . . .|.|32|
|F|TEST TO IDENTIFY STAINLESS STEEL GRADE AS 1449/316 OR 316L .|.|40|
|H|MEANS FOR DEMONSTRATING COMPLIANCE WITH THIS STANDARD||42|





## STANDARDS AUSTRALIA/STANDARDS NEW ZEALAND 

## Australian/New Zealand Standard Built-in components for masonry construction 



1.1 SCOPE AND APPLICATION This Standard specifies the requirements for wall ties — for use in tying together 

- (a) the leaves of cavity masonry walls; 

- (b) masonry veneer walls and load-bearing frames; and 

- (c) masonry veneer walls against a strong backing wall. 

## NOTES: 

- 1 AS/NZS 2699.2 specifies the durability performance and test procedures for structural performance of connectors and accessories used in masonry construction. 

- 2 AS/NZS 2699.3 specifies the requirements for durability of lintels and shelf angles. 

- 3 This Standard gives categories of wall ties, and classifies wall ties by characteristic strength and durability and, where applicable, characteristic stiffness. 

- 4 The durability classifications employed in this Standard are compatible with the environments specified in AS/NZS 2312, NZS 3604 and AS 3700. 

- 5 Design and installation of wall ties are specified in AS 3700, NZS 4210 and NZS 4230. 

This Standard applies to ties used in masonry described in AS 3700, NZS 4210 and NZS 4230, including those used in thin-jointed masonry (for example, autoclaved aerated concrete (AAC) blockwork). 

1.2 REFERENCED DOCUMENTS The following documents are referred to in this Standard: 

AS 

- 1199 Sampling procedures and tables for inspection by attributes 1397 Steel  sheet  and  strip — Hot-dipped zinc-coated or aluminium/zinc-coated — 

- 1399 Guide  to  AS  1199 Sampling procedures and tables for inspection by attributes — 

- 1449 Wrought alloy steels Stainless and heat-resisting steel plate, sheet and strip 1580 Paints and related materials— Methods of test 1580.481 Coatings — 

- 1580.481.1.9 Method 481.1.9: Exposed to weathering Degree of blistering 1580.481.1.10 Method 481.1.10: Exposed to weathering— Degree of flaking and peeling 1580.481.3 Method 481.3: Exposed to weathering— Degree of corrosion of coated metal substrates 

2193 Methods for calibration and grading of force-measuring systems of testing machines 




|AS||
|---|---|
|2331|Methods of test for metallic and related coatings|
|2331.2.1|Method 2.1: Average thickness tests—Dissolution methods—Strip and|
||weigh, and analytical|
|2331.3.1|Method 3.1: Corrosion and related property tests—Neutral salt spray test|
||(NSS) test|
|3700|Masonry  structures|
|3894|Site testing of protective coatings|
|3894.3|Method 3: Determination of dry flm thickness|
|3942|Quality  control—Variables chart—Guide|
|AS/NZS||
|2312|Guide to the protection of iron and steel against exterior atmospheric|
||corrosion|
|2699|Built-in components for masonry construction|
|2699.2|Part 2: Connectors and accessories|
|2699.3|Part 3: Lintels and shelf angles (Durability requirements)|
|4455|Masonry units and segmental pavers|
|4534|Zinc and zinc/aluminium-alloy coatings on steel wire|
|4680|Hot-dip galvanized (zinc) coatings on fabricated ferrous articles|
|ISO 9000|Quality management and quality assurance standards|
|ISO 9000.1|Part 1: Guidelines for selection and use|
|ISO 9004|Quality management and quality system elements|
|ISO 9004.1|Part 1: Guidelines|
|NZS||
|3604|Timber framed buildings|
|4203|General structural design and design loadings for buildings|
|4210|Code of practice for masonry construction: materials and workmanship|
|4230|Code of practice for the design of masonry structures|
|4230.1|Part 1: Structures|
|4230.2|Part 2: Commentary|
|SAA/SANZ||
|HB18|Guidelines for third-party certifcation and accreditation.|
|HB18.28|Guide 28: General rules for a model third-party certifcation scheme for|
||products|
|ASTM||
|G1|Standard practice for preparing, cleaning and evaluating corrosion test|
||specimens|



1.3 NEW TECHNOLOGIES This Standard shall not be interpreted as preventing the use of materials or methods of manufacture not specifically referred to herein, provided the specified performance criteria are met. 




1.4 DEFINITIONS For the purpose of this Standard, the definitions below apply. 

1.4.1 Cavity tie— a wall tie designed to connect two leaves of masonry that are separated by a clear cavity of any width. 

1.4.2 Characteristic stiffness— the stiffness used to determine the classification under Clause 2.7, calculated in accordance with Appendix A for Type B ties. 

1.4.3 Characteristic strength— the strength used to determine the classification under Clause 2.7, calculated in accordance with Appendix A for Type B ties and Appendix B for Type A ties. 

1.4.4 Characteristic value— the value that is exceeded by at least 95% of the ties in the lot. 

1.4.5 Duplex coating— a coating system that provides corrosion protection through the combination of an organic barrier coating applied to galvanized steel. 

NOTE: A film of organic matter, such as paint or plastic, is not an automatic indication of a duplex coating. Such films may simply have been applied to identify the durability classi fication (see Clause 4.1). 

1.4.6 Durability classification (R)— identifies the level of corrosion protection provided to a tie to meet the performance condition for the design life of a structure. 

NOTE: The classifications R0 to R5 are individually defined by reference to exposure conditions given in AS 3700. 

1.4.7 Face loads— the loads applied normal to the face of the wall, which impose compressive or tensile forces on the ties. 

1.4.8 Galvanized coating— a protective zinc coating alloyed to the steel substrate and applied by hot-dip immersion in molten zinc of at least 98% purity. 

1.4.9 In-plane loads— the loads applied in the plane of the wall, which impose bending and shear forces on the ties. 

1.4.10 Lot — a group of wall ties of a single type with specific characteristics and dimensions, presented for sampling at the same time. 

1.4.11 Masonry couplet— two stack-bonded masonry units joined by a bed of mortar, or adhesive, as appropriate. 

1.4.12 Organic coating— a protective coating, based on one or more organic resins, in liquid or powder form, applied to the substrate. 

1.4.13 Specimen— a specially prepared item for testing, consisting of masonry wall tie or ties embedded in a masonry couplet, possibly affixed to a length of timber or metal stud or embedded in another couplet, to simulate the various service conditions or, where more than one type of service condition applies to that tie, the most demanding. 

1.4.14 Veneer tie— a wall tie designed to connect an outer masonry skin to an inner wall of timber, metal or other relevant material. 

## 1.4.15 Wall ties 

1.4.15.1 Type A tie — a tie not required to have specific seismic design characteristics. Type A ties are as follows: 

- 

- (a) Type A cavity tie a tie, together with its fixings or anchorages, used to transfer face loads between skins (leaves) of a cavity wall while being capable of accommodating differential in-plane horizontal and vertical deflections between the attached elements. 

- 

- (b) Type A veneer tie a tie, together with its fixings or anchorages, used to transfer face loads from a veneer to a structural backing while being capable of accommodating differential in-plane horizontal and vertical deflections between the attached elements. 




- 

- (c) Type A remedial tie a tie manufactured for installation after a masonry leaf has been erected. Remedial ties may be either cavity ties or masonry veneer ties and are usually used to replace defective ties, or where ties have been omitted. 

NOTE: The requirements for the use of Type A ties are given in AS 3700. 

1.4.15.2 Type B tie — a tie required to have specific design characteristics under cyclic dynamic loading, such as occurs under seismic conditions. Type B ties are as follows: 

- 

- (a) Type B non-flexible veneer tie a tie, including its fixings or anchorages, used to transfer face loads between a masonry veneer and a structural backing, while being being capable of accommodating differential in-plane horizontal and vertical movements between the attached elements, during which time the cavity width may vary. 

## NOTES: 

      - 1 Type B non-flexible veneer ties may transmit shear forces across the cavity from the seismic-resisting structure to the veneer when it is subjected to in-plane earthquake effects with relative movements of up to ±20 mm. 

      - ‘ ’ 

      - 2 In New Zealand these ties are known as standard ties . 

- (b) Type B flexible veneer tie— a tie that, together with its fixings and anchorages, is capable of transmitting face loads between a masonry veneer and its structural wall, while not transferring shear or bending loads across the cavity when accommodating differential in-plane horizontal and vertical deflections between the attached elements. 

- 

- (c) Type B remedial tie a tie with specific seismic design characteristics manufactured for installation after a masonry leaf has been erected. Remedial ties are usually used to replace defective ties or where ties have been omitted. 

   - NOTE: The requirements for the use of Type B ties are given in NZS 4210 and NZS 4230. 





2.1 SCOPE OF SECTION This Section sets out specific requirements for the design and manufacture of wall ties. 

Categories of wall ties are as follows: 

- (a) Type A ties, which comprise the following: 

   - (i) Cavity ties. 

   - (ii) Veneer ties 

   - (iii) Remedial ties. 

- (b) Type B ties, which comprise the following: 

   - (i) Non-flexible veneer ties. 

   - (ii) Flexible veneer ties. 

   - (iii) Remedial ties. 

- 2.2 AIM The performance criteria set out in this Section are designed to ensure that — 

- (a) wall ties are durable and serviceable, and have adequate strength, while satisfying other relevant criteria such as resistance to water transfer; and 

- (b) there is no loss of function of ties or adverse effect on the masonry over a design life of not less than 50 years, except for those intended for durability classi fication R5, which requires the use of specifically designed ties. 

- 2.3 SAFETY Ties shall be manufactured without sharp features, such as points or corners, that could injure site workers. 

## 2.4 DURABILITY 

2.4.1 General Materials for the manufacture of masonry wall ties shall be either inherently corrosion resistant or suitably coated to impart adequate corrosion resistance to achieve design life. 

2.4.2 Damage Each wall tie shall be free from fracture or surface cracks. Where ties are fabricated from coated sheet, wire or bar, the manufacturing process shall not materially damage the corrosion-resistant coating except at cut edges or ends. 

2.4.3 Classification of materials Ties manufactured from any material shall be identified as durability classifications R0 to R5, by application of the acceptance criteria in Clause 2.4.4. 

2.4.4 Durability criteria for wall ties Ties shall suffer no loss in serviceability or performance over the design life of the structure (see Clause 2.2) when subjected to the following in-service conditions: 

- (a) Elevated temperatures with a maximum of 55°C, where the tie is exposed on the external face of the masonry (for example, some remedial ties), or 40°C, where the tie is embedded within the mortar bed in accordance with Clause 2.6. 

- (b) A cyclic temperature variation of 40°C over any 24 h period. 

- (c) The mortar bed having an initial alkalinity with a pH of up to 10, but carbonating over time to a pH of not less than 7. 

- (d) Being wet and remaining wet for a period of three months per year. 




- (e) Exposure to UV radiation (global radiation of 20 MJ/m[2] ) for a period of up to four weeks (the construction period). 

- (f) Aerosol penetration, with the highest level of airborne salt deposited at the exterior of the masonry, as follows: 


   - 1 The extent of aerosol penetration depends largely on the distance from the coast; however, in practice, microclimatic effects may distort otherwise normal climatic patterns by many kilometres and should always be taken into account. The salt deposition in the wall cavity would normally be half that experienced on the exterior face of the wall. The values used in Appendix C reflect this situation. 

   - 2 The R5 durability classification refers to specific corrosive environments outside the above criteria. Where industrial fall-out, bacteria, chemicals or other environmental conditions exist, it is necessary for the manufacturer to test all unique coatings and materials to con firm their resistance to the particular environment for the expected life of the structure. Because that environment cannot be specified in this document, suitable coating systems cannot be recommended. 

2.4.5 Test methods Ties produced from materials not meeting the deemed-to-comply provisions (see Section 3) shall be tested and assessed for compliance in accordance with Appendix C or Appendix D, as appropriate. 

For ties produced from other materials, such as polymers, no specific test methods are available and alternative means of compliance with the criteria set out in Clause 2.4.4 shall be demonstrated by the manufacturer. 

2.4.6 Durability criteria for fasteners The veneer wall tie and its fasteners shall be galvanically and chemically compatible, and the combination shall have a corrosion resistance of at least that of the tie alone. (See Clause 2.6(g).) 

2.5 RESISTANCE TO WATER TRANSFER Wall ties shall be manufactured such that, when tested in accordance with Appendix E, no tie from the sample permits water transfer across the cavity. 

## 2.6 EMBEDMENT, MOVEMENT AND TOLERANCE Wall ties shall be manufactured such that the following criteria is met: 

- (a) The anchorage section of a wall tie shall be capable of being bedded on, and completely surrounded by, mortar. 

- (b) They shall be capable of being easily immobilized within the mortar bed, with a layer of mortar under and above the anchorage section of the tie. 

- (c) They shall be capable of being mechanically keyed within the mortar bed. 

- (d) They shall be designed in such a way that they are easily and practicably embedded in mortar as the construction proceeds. 





- (f) The part of a wall tie that provides anchorage to the mortar bed joint in masonry shall have an overall height of the anchorage section, including any crimping or bending, not exceeding 70% of the design joint thickness. This limitation shall not apply to ties used with autoclaved aerated concrete blockwork constructed with thin-bed mortar, but provision shall be made to accommodate the thickness of the tie. 

- (g) Wall ties that are intended to be fixed to non-rigid members shall be capable of being fixed by non-impact methods (for example, screwing), unless it can be shown that the method of fixing will not adversely affect the ability of the tie or the mortar to perform as required. 

Tie and fasteners shall be supplied as an integral system. 

NOTES: 

   - 1 Screw fixings do not suffer or produce the same problems as do impact fixings, such as nails. 

   - 2 Galvanic compatibility between tie and fastener is required by Clause 2.4.6. 

- (h) The tolerance between any moving parts of veneer ties in the direction of the face loads shall be such as to allow no movement. 

- (i) Type B wall ties shall be capable of tolerating both horizontal and vertical differential movements of the leaf and the loadbearing frame, so as to maintain compliance with the applicable requirements of Table 2, when subjected to the applicable displacements in Paragraph A8, Appendix A. 

- (j) Type B wall ties shall be designed and made so that no component of a tie disengages in service, including during earthquakes. 

- (k) Type B flexible veneer ties in their unstressed condition shall be constructed so as to not reduce or increase the cavity width by more than 2 mm when accommodating differential in-plane horizontal and vertical deflections between the attached elements as described in Paragraph A8, Appendix A. 

- (l) Remedial ties shall be manufactured to satisfy the performance requirements for Type A or Type B wall ties. Those remedial ties intended for use in upgrading buildings in earthquake-prone areas shall be capable of satisfying the horizontal inplane and out-of-plane loads and deflections as set out in Paragraph A8, Appendix A, for Type B veneer ties supported from flexible structures. Remedial ties used to upgrade cavity wall buildings shall comply with Clause 2.7.2 for Type A cavity ties. 

## 2.7 STRUCTURAL PERFORMANCE— STRENGTH AND STIFFNESS 

2.7.1 Strength Wall ties shall be tested in accordance with Appendix A or Appendix B. The characteristic stiffness values in tension and compression so obtained for Type B ties shall be not less than the appropriate values given in Table 2 for the particular duty classi cation. 




2.7.2 Classification of Type A ties Cavity and veneer ties shall be classified in accordance with their characteristic strength as shown in Table 1. The classi fication is as follows: 

- (a) Light duty. 

- (b) Medium duty. 

- (c) Heavy duty. 

## TABLE 1 

## MINIMUM CHARACTERISTIC STRENGTH OF TYPE A VENEER TIES AND TYPE A CAVITY TIES 

|||||Minimum|characteristic strength, kN|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||||Classifcation|||
|||||Tension|Compression|
|Light|duty|||0.20|0.24|
|Medium|||duty|0.40|0.48|
|Heavy||duty||1.00|1.20|



NOTE: A lower bound value on stiffness is imposed on ties by the test method. This places an upper limit of 1.5 mm on the tie de ection at ultimate load. 

2.7.3 Classification of Type B ties Veneer ties for use in seismic areas shall be classified in accordance with their characteristic strength and stiffness as shown in Table 2. The classi cation is as follows: 

- (a) Earthquake light duty (EL). 

- (b) Earthquake medium duty (EM). 

- (c) Earthquake heavy duty (EH). 

## TABLE 2 

## TYPE B VENEER TIES (FLEXIBLE OR NON-FLEXIBLE) MINIMUM CHARACTERISTIC STRENGTH AND CHARACTERISTIC STIFFNESS UNDER AXIAL LOADING 

|||Minimum||
|---|---|---|---|
|Classifcation for<br>seismic veneer tie|Minimum<br>characteristic<br>axial stiffness<br>kN/mm|characteristic axial<br>strength (at the end of<br>4th, 10 mm tension<br>cycle)|Minimum characteristic<br>residual strength (at end<br>of 15 mm cycle) kN|
|||kN||
|Light duty (EL)|0.150|0.500|0.350|
|Medium duty (EM)|0.175|0.750|0.550|
|Heavy duty (EH)|0.200|1.500|1.100|



NOTE: Type B non-flexible veneer ties are known as ‘standard ties’ in New Zealand. 





Wall ties complying with Table 3 (for sheet) or Table 4 (for wire) are deemed to meet the durability criteria of Clause 2.4.4. 

## NOTES: 

- 1 Galvanized steel wire employed for the manufacture of masonry wall ties is normally supplied to a tensile strength speci fication of 550 MPa max. 

- 2 Wall tie feedstock, already appropriately coloured for durability classification identification, may be available from materials suppliers. 

## TABLE 3 

## DURABILITY CLASSIFICATION FOR MASONRY WALL TIES MANUFACTURED FROM STEEL SHEET 

- Durability Material requirement 

- classification (a) Masonry wall ties manufactured from galvanized steel sheet complying with AS 1397 with a galvanized coating of at least grade Z600 

- R0, R1, R2 (b) Masonry wall ties galvanized after manufacture from bare steel sheet and complying with AS/NZS 4680 except that the coating mass shall be at least 300 g/m[2] on each side 

- Masonry wall ties galvanized after manufacture from bare steel sheet and complying with 

- R3 AS/NZS 4680 except that the coating mass shall be at least 470 g/m[2] on each side Stainless steel grade AS 1449/316 or AS 1449/316L. (UNS S31600 or UNS S31603 


   - (a) Masonry wall ties manufactured from galvanized steel sheet complying with AS 1397 with a galvanized coating of at least grade Z600 

NOTE: For ties of durability classification R5, see Clause 2.4.4, Note 2. 

## TABLE 4 

## DURABILITY CLASSIFICATION FOR MASONRY WALL TIES MANUFACTURED FROM STEEL WIRE (OR BAR) 

- Durability Material requirement 

- classification (a) Masonry wall ties manufactured from galvanized steel wire (or bar) complying with AS/NZS 4534, except that the galvanized coating mass shall be at least 470 g/m[2] . 

- R0, R1, R2, R3 (b) Masonry wall ties galvanized after manufacture from bare steel wire (or bar) and complying with AS/NZS 4680 except that the coating mass shall be at least 470 g/m[2] 

- Stainless steel grade AS 1449/316 or AS 1449/316L (UNS S31600 or UNS S31603 

- R4 respectively). 

NOTES: 

> 1 A chemical procedure is described in Appendix F for the identification of grade AS 1449/316 or AS 1449/316L stainless steel. 

- 2 For ties of durability classification R5, see Clause 2.4.4, Note 2. 





4.1 TIE MARKING Each wall tie shall be colour coded or stamped with an identifiable mark to indicate its durability classification. This colour code or mark shall be such that it is readily visible in the cavity portion of the building construction. 

Where colour coding is used for ties, the coding shall be as follows: 




White shall be used only for colour-coded R4 uncoated (bare) materials, except that stainless steel ties may be supplied uncoloured. 

## NOTE: See Clause 3.1, Note 2. 

Wall ties of durability classification R5, being dedicated items for critical applications, shall be labelled or otherwise identified, in a manner agreeable to both manufacturer and purchaser. 

Where stamping is employed for strip metal ties, they shall be stamped 0, 1, 2, 3 or 4 to indicate R0, R1, R2, R3 or R4 respectively. 

Where additional stamping is used, the markings on Type B ties shall be as follows: 


4.2 PACKAGE MARKING The following information shall be marked on each package of wall ties, or on a label securely attached thereto: 

- (a) Reference to this Standard, that is, AS/NZS 2699.1. 

- (b) Name or registered trade name or mark and address of manufacturer. 

- (c) Duty classification. 

- (d) Rated cavity width, in millimetres. 

- (e) Durability classification. 

- (f) If applicable, fastening requirements. 

- (g) Any limitations on the use of the tie, including those not specifically identified in the Standard. 

## NOTES: 

- 1 For an example of labelling see Appendix G. 

- 2 Manufacturers making a statement of compliance with this Australian/New Zealand Standard on a product, packaging, or promotional material related to that product are advised to ensure that such compliance is capable of being veri fied. 





5.1 GENERAL Prototype ties shall be tested and assessed for compliance with Section 2 before commercial manufacture begins. If their design, method of manufacture or material is changed subsequently, prototypes produced in accordance with the changed conditions shall be tested and assessed for compliance. 

Wall ties manufactured from materials that are deemed by Clause 3.1 to satisfy durability criteria are not required to be tested for durability. 

Where the properties of a given lot of wall ties are to be tested for compliance with this Standard, the wall ties shall be sampled at random from that lot unless otherwise speci fied. 

Ties shall also be sampled and monitored during production to ensure compliance with: 

- (a) the tolerances stated on dimensioned drawings on which the prototypes tested were based; and 

- (b) the specifications for base materials and coatings, where appropriate — 

   - (i) as set down in Table 3 or Table 4; or 

   - (ii) on which the durability classification was established in accordance with the tests described in Appendix C or Appendix D; or 

   - (iii) on which the durability classification was established, for materials such as polymers, by means of an alternative demonstration of compliance with the criteria specified in Clause 2.4.4. 

NOTE: Means for demonstrating compliance with this Standard are given in Appendix H. 

5.2 SAMPLING The number of wall ties sampled from a lot shall be not less than the number given for the relevant test (see Appendices A, B, C D and E). 

Where ties are not symmetrical on inversion and do not have a designated top face, separate tests shall be carried out on both possible orientations. 

5.3 MANUFACTURERS CERTIFICATE Where tests are not required to be carried out in the presence of purchasers or their representatives, manufacturers shall, if requested at the time of ordering, furnish purchasers or their representatives with a certificate which states that the wall ties comply with the requirements of this Standard. 




## APPENDIX A 

## METHOD FOR DETERMINING THE STIFFNESS AND STRENGTH OF TYPE B VENEER TIES 

(Normative) 

A1 SCOPE This Appendix sets out the method for determining the stiffness and characteristic strength of a lot of Type B veneer or remedial ties. 

A2 PRINCIPLE Test specimens are constructed in a way that closely simulates actual building techniques, while still allowing their ease of dismantling for test. Ties are firstly axially displaced to determine serviceability. Ties are then displaced in the plane of the wall simulating random seismic movement before being subjected to axial displacement to determine strength. 

NOTE: The masonry unit size is not critical to the assessment of the tie under test, but should be in the range. 




## A3 MATERIALS The following materials shall be required: 

- 

- (a) Masonry units clay, concrete, calcium silicate or AAC units, as appropriate, complying with AS/NZS 4455. 

- (b) Mortar — for clay units, type 1:2:9 (cement:lime:sand by volume); for concrete or calcium silicate units, type 1:0:5 with water thickener; and for AAC units, thin-bed mortar. 

   - NOTE: In this test the bond strength between masonry unit and mortar is assumed to be not less than 0.2 MPa. 

- (c) Structural member — for veneer ties only, 2.4 m lengths of stud 90 mm × 35 mm in radiata pine No.1 framing grade or of equivalent stiffness stress grade F5, or 450 mm lengths of metal stud or other relevant structural member. 

- (d) Ties — as supplied by the manufacturer, complete with the specified fasteners for timber, steel or other material, as appropriate. 

A4 APPARATUS A testing machine that complies, in terms of accuracy, with the requirements for Grade A or Grade B machines of AS 2193. The machine shall be capable of — 

- (a) holding the specimen firmly and without damage, while maintaining the preload specified; and 

- (b) applying the relative displacements specified herein without relative twist, rotation or tilt. 

- A5 SAMPLE A minimum of six test specimens, each containing one tie, shall be prepared for the given lot. 

— The tie manufacturer shall provide to the testing authority 

- (a) a specification of the principal properties of the tie material; and 

- (b) a dimensioned drawing of the tie nominating key tolerances. 





   - The specimens shall be constructed as follows: 

- (a) On  a firm floor erect a 2.4 m high stud with top and bottom plates firmly braced (see Figure A1). 

NOTE: For ease of disassembling the specimens for testing, consideration should be given to screwing the required short lengths of stud (timber, metal or other relevant material) to a 2.4 m high timber stud. 

- (b) At the maximum cavity width specified by the tie manufacturer, lay four masonry units in stack bond using normal bricklaying actions. To facilitate dismantling the specimens, insert a polythene or other suitable bond breaker in the third mortar course. Masonry units are to be laid at a minimum rate of one course per minute. 

- (c) Bed the tie in mortar on the top masonry unit, so that there is a layer of mortar above and below the tie, and fix it to the stud in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. 

- (d) Mortar the masonry unit and lay four more units, with polythene in the first and third mortar courses. 

- (e) Repeat Steps (b), (c) and (d) until six ties have been installed up to the height of the stud (see Figure A1). 

- (f) Cover the construction with a polythene sheet to prevent evaporation of moisture from the mortar and leave undisturbed for 28 to 35 days. 

- (g) Carefully cut the stud into convenient lengths, or unscrew the attached short lengths of stud, for testing and separate the masonry units into couplets at each tie. 

## A7 PREPARATION OF SPECIMENS FOR TESTING 

A7.1 Age at testing The specimens shall be tested from 28 to 35 days after manufacture. 

A7.2 Selection of specimens The specimens shall be randomly divided into two equal groups, one group to be axially cycled first in tension and the other first in compression. 

A7.3 Setting up for testing Each specimen shall be firmly held in the testing machine in the relative position it would occupy if no displacement had occurred. Apply a compressive preload to the couplet so as to produce between 10 kPa and 100 kPa across the bedding joint. 

NOTE: For metal studs used with masonry veneer ties, the stud may be supported along the full length of the flange opposite the tie attachment so as to prevent de flection of the longitudinal axis of the stud. The ends may also be clamped 450 mm apart to prevent distortion of the cross-section. 

The length of timber stud shall then be displaced down from its position in the original wall by 10 mm relative to the masonry couplet without relative tilting, twisting or rotation, and without disturbing the mortar bed. Similarly, the length of metal stud shall be displaced down 5 mm. 





DIMENSIONS IN MILLIMETRES 

FIGURE A1 SPECIMEN CONSTRUCTION 


## The procedure shall be as follows: 

- (a) Ensure that the specimen is firmly held in the displaced position (see Paragraph A7.3). 

- (b) Carry out one of the following steps, as appropriate: 

   - (i) For each tie to be tested in tension first, subject the tie to a displacement along its axis perpendicular to the plane of the wall of 2 mm ±0.5 mm in tension followed by 2 mm in compression, return to zero displacement, and record the forces resisted at each displacement limit. 

   - (ii) For each tie to be tested in compression first, subject the tie to a displacement along its axis perpendicular to the plane of the wall of 2 mm ±0.5 mm in compression followed by 2 mm in tension, return to zero displacement, and record the forces resisted at each displacement limit. 

NOTE: If the results obtained at 2 mm in Step (d) after in-plane displacement prove sufficient to meet serviceability criteria, then those results may be used and Step (b) of the procedure may be omitted. 




- (c) Carry out tests on specimens in the following sequence: 

   - (i) Non- fl exible veneer ties Subject the tie to 4 cycles of displacement to ±20 mm (that is, 8 load reversals) in a direction equivalent to a horizontal orientation in the plane of the original wall. Return to zero displacement. No recordings are required. 

      - NOTE: Designers may find the loads resisted and stiffness encountered during this regime useful. It is suggested that manufacturers acquire this information during the test and that it be reported as part of their test results. 

   - (ii) Flexible veneer ties Subject the tie to 4 cycles of displacement to ±40 mm (that is, 8 load reversals) in a direction equivalent to a horizontal orientation in the plane of the original wall. Return to zero displacement, and observe or measure the change in cavity width during this regime. 

- (d) Subject the tie to the following displacements along the axis of the tie: 

   - (i) 4 cycles of ±2 mm, 4 cycles of ±10 mm, 1 cycle of ±15 mm. 

   - (ii) Record the force and displacement either by a continuous graphical method or by readings at sufficiently regular intervals to provide hysteresis loops for data analysis. 

- (e) For metal studs, ensure that any flange deformation in the region of the tie attachment is not prevented during the test. 

## A9 DETERMINATION OF PROPERTIES OF INDIVIDUAL SPECIMENS 

A9.1 Stiffness The stiffness of each tie shall be the average of the forces resisted at the 2 mm deflection limits in tension and compression. 

A9.2 Strength The strength of each tie shall be the peak tension load resisted during the fourth cycle of displacement at ±10 mm. The residual strength shall be the peak tension load resisted during the 15 mm cycle. 

## A10 CALCULATION OF VALUES FOR THE LOT OF TIES 

A10.1 Characteristic stiffness The characteristic stiffness of the lot shall be the average of the values for all of the specimens. 

A10.2 Characteristic strength The characteristic strength of the lot shall be calculated using the following equation: 



where 

Xc = characteristic strength 

- x = average of the results calculated as in Paragraph A9, including the zero values where appropriate 

- s = standard deviation of the sample 

## A11 REPORT The following information shall be reported: 

- (a) Reference to this Standard, that is, AS/NZS 2699.1 

- (b) Identification of the test method. 

- (c) Identification of the lot of ties, including — 

   - (i) manufacturer; 

   - (ii) tie description, including the specification and drawings provided by the tie manufacturer. 




   - (iii) maximum cavity width; and 

   - (iv) source of the lot. 

- (d) Name of testing authority and the person responsible for the test. 

- (e) Date and location of test. 

- (f) Age of the specimens when tested. 

- (g) For each tie — 

   - (i) stiffness value; 

   - (ii) strength value; and 

   - (iii) any pertinent observation. 

- (h) For the lot — 

   - (i) characteristic stiffness; and 

   - (ii) characteristic strength, axial and residual. 

- (i) Any variation from the test procedure. 

- (j) Comments, if necessary. 

- (k) Summary of results giving classification of tested item. 




## APPENDIX B METHOD FOR THE DETERMINATION OF THE STRENGTH OF TYPE A TIES 

(Normative) 

B1 SCOPE This Appendix sets out the method of testing for the strength of a given lot of Type A wall ties. 

B2 PRINCIPLE Ties are installed in specimens to simulate their in-service condition. Cavity ties are set at each end into a bonded couplet of masonry units. Masonry veneer ties are set at one end into a bonded couplet of masonry units and attached at the other end to a piece of structural member. Remedial ties are assembled in masonry units of the same material as in the actual installation in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Each specimen is placed in a testing apparatus which imposes a relfative movement of the tie ends and subjects the specimen to a tensile or compressive force. Failure is determined by either fracture or excessive de ection of the tie. 

## B3 MATERIALS The materials required shall be as follows: 

- 

- (a) Masonry units clay, concrete, calcium silicate or AAC units, as appropriate, complying with AS/NZS 4455. 

- (b) Mortar — for clay units, type 1:2:9 (cement:lime:sand by volume); for concrete or calcium silicate units, type 1:0:5 with water thickener; and for AAC units, thin-bed mortar. 

NOTE: In this test the bond strength between masonry unit and mortar is assumed to be not less than 0.2 MPa. 

- 

- (c) Spacer for cavity ties only, timber spacer cut to the width of the designated cavity. 

- 

- (d) Vapour-proof sheet sufficient to wrap the specimens. 

- (e) Structural member — for veneer ties only, 150 mm lengths of stud 90 mm × 35 mm in radiata pine No.1 framing grade or of equivalent stiffness stress grade F5, or 450 mm lengths of metal stud or other relevant structural member. 

- (f) Ties — as supplied by the manufacturer complete with the specified fasteners for timber, steel or other material, as appropriate. 

B4 APPARATUS A testing machine that complies, in terms of accuracy, with the requirements for grade A or grade B machines given in AS 2193. The machine shall be capable of the following: 

- (a) Holding firmly each specimen in the position described in Paragraph B7.3. 

- (b) Displacing the specimen as described in Paragraph B7.3 by the amounts specified in Table B1. 

- (c) Applying either tension or compression force along the (undisplaced) axis of the tie. 

B5 SAMPLE A minimum of 12 test specimens, each containing one tie, shall be prepared for a given lot, due account being taken of the requirements contained in Paragraph B6.1 and Paragraph B11.1. 

— The tie manufacturer shall provide to the testing authority 

- (a) a specification of the principal properties of the tie material; and 

- (b) a dimensioned drawing of the tie nominating key tolerances. 





B6.1 Form of specimens Specimens shall be built to the cavity width prescribed by the manufacturer for that length of tie. 

The form of specimens shall be as follows: 

- 

- (a) For cavity ties a pair of stack-bonded couplets joined by one wall tie. 

- 

- (b) For masonry veneer ties a stack-bonded couplet linked by one wall tie to a short piece of structural member. 

- (c) For remedial ties — a pair of masonry units linked by one remedial tie. 

- B6.2 Construction 

- B6.2.1 For cavity ties The specimens shall be constructed as follows: 

- (a) Place a timber spacer cut with its horizontal width equal to the designated cavity, and its vertical dimension not exceeding 50 mm, on a vapour-proof sheet on a horizontal surface. 

- (b) Set out masonry units, according to the number of specimens, along each side of the timber spacer, with the heads of the units separated by approximately 13 mm. 

- (c) Place a bed of mortar on the units using a normal bricklaying action or, when thin-joint bedding is used, spread adhesive evenly across all units. 

- (d) Install the ties into the mortar bed or adhesive joint, one tie to each unit, in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions or, if no specific instructions are provided, in accordance with accepted good practice. Ties shall be installed in a position such that they are symmetrically placed on the units at right angles to the inside faces and fully embedded in the mortar or jointing material. 

   - NOTE: For masonry units laid with mortar joints, accepted good practice is an embedment in accordance with Clause 2.6(e). 

- (e) After not less than 1 min nor more than 4 min from the commencement of spreading of the bed, place the second course of units, ensuring a uniform 10 ±3 mm joint thickness for a mortar bed, or in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation for thin-bed jointing. Strike off any excess mortar, including at perpend joints. 

- (f) Wrap the specimens in the vapour-proof sheet and leave them undisturbed for 7 days. 

- (g) Remove the spacer before testing. 

- B6.2.2 For masonry-veneer ties The specimens shall be constructed as follows: 

- (a) Fix the ties in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations to short lengths of timber or short lengths of other relevant structural member. 

- (b) Set out masonry units, according to the number of specimens, along a straight line upon a vapour-proof sheet on a horizontal surface, with the heads of the units separated by approximately 13 mm. 

- (c) Place a bed of mortar on the units using a normal bricklaying action or, when thin-joint bedding is used, spread adhesive evenly across all units. 

- (d) Install the ties into the mortar bed or adhesive joint, one tie to each unit, in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions or, if no specific instructions are provided, in accordance with accepted good practice. Ties shall be installed in a position such that they are symmetrically placed on the units at right angles to the inside faces and fully embedded in the mortar or jointing material. Ensure the correct cavity width is maintained between the faces of the unit and the stud to which the ties are attached. 

   - NOTE: For masonry units laid with mortar joints, accepted good practice is an embedment in accordance with Clause 2.6(e). 




- (e) After not less than 1 min nor more than 4 min from the commencement of spreading of the bed, place the second course of units, ensuring a uniform 10 ±3 mm joint thickness for a mortar bed, or in accordance with the manufacturer ’s recommendation for thin-bed jointing. Strike off any excess mortar, including perpend joints. 

- (f) Wrap the specimens in the vapour-proof sheet and leave them undisturbed for 7 days. 

B6.2.3 For remedial ties Install the ties in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions using the same masonry that is to be rectified. Remedial ties are usually installed through the masonry unit rather than in the mortar joint. 

## B7 PREPARATION OF SPECIMENS FOR TESTING 

B7.1 Age at testing The specimens shall be tested 7 days after their manufacture. Remedial ties shall be tested at the age required by the manufacturer’s installation instructions. 

B7.2 Selection of specimens The specimens shall be randomly divided into two equal groups, one of which shall be tested in compression and the other in tension. 

B7.3 Setting up for testing Each specimen (that is, pair of couplets, or couplet and structural member) shall be firmly held by the machine in the relative position it would occupy if no displacement occurred. 

NOTE: For metal studs used with masonry veneer ties, the stud may be supported along the full length of the flange opposite the tie attachment so as to prevent de flection of the longitudinal axis of the stud. The ends may also be clamped 450 mm apart to prevent distortion of the cross-section. 

The couplets, or couplet and structural member, shall then be displaced relative to each other by an amount dependent on the type of tie being tested, in accordance with Table B1. The horizontal displacement shall be applied first in the direction producing the most adverse effect, followed by the vertical displacement. If the tie has a designated top face, the vertical displacement shall be applied in the direction of relative movement expected in service, taking into account shrinkage of timber, expansion of fired clay and shrinkage of concrete or calcium silicate products. If there is no designated top face, the relative vertical displacement shall be in the direction expected to produce the worst conditions for the tie. 

The method adopted to achieve the displacement shall be such as not to prevent disruption of the bed joint. The couplets, or couplet and structural member, shall be restrained from any relative twisting, tilting or rotation without applying a clamping force normal to the joint. 

NOTE: Wall ties may be subject to vertical and horizontal shear stresses resulting from differential movement of different masonry leaf materials, or masonry leaf and structural frame material, in the plane of the wall. The displacement used in the test is intended to equate with the worst in-service conditions. 




TABLE B1 

## DISPLACEMENT OF ENDS OF TYPE A WALL TIES FOR TESTING 

|||Displacement, mm|Displacement, mm|
|---|---|---|---|
||Category and application of tie|||
|||Vertical|Horizontal|
|Cavity<br>ties||5|10|
|Masonry|veneer  ties  for  timber  frame  construction|10|10|
|Masonry|veneer  ties  for  metal  frame  construction|5|10|
|Remedial|ties|0|0|



## B8 TEST PROCEDURE The procedure shall be as follows: 

- (a) Ensure that the specimen is securely held in the displaced position (see Paragraph B7.3). 

- (b) Subject the tie to either tensile or compressive force along the axis it held before displacement, normal to the inside face of the couplet, and simultaneously measure the displacement between the two components of the specimen (see Figure B1). 

NOTE: For cavity ties, displacement should be measured between the inside faces of the masonry couplets. For masonry veneer ties, displacement should be measured between the inside face of the masonry couplet and the undistorted axis of the structural member (see Paragraph B7.3). 

- (c) Increase the force steadily until the tie fails (loses integrity) or deflects more than 1.5 mm. 

- (d) For metal studs used with masonry veneer ties, ensure that any local flange deformation in the region of the tie attachment is not prevented during test. 

- (e) Record the maximum force at failure (loss of integrity) or 1.5 mm deflection. 

- B9 DETERMINATION OF STRENGTH OF INDIVIDUAL TIES The strength of each tie in kilonewtons shall be taken as that force required to induce either — 

- (a) failure (loss of integrity) of the tie; or 

- (b) 1.5 mm deflection measured in accordance with Paragraph B8(b), whichever occurs rst. 

B10 ABNORMAL TEST RESULTS A result may be assessed as being abnormal only if a specific reason for its abnormality is clearly evident or if its value is outside the limits calculated in accordance with this Paragraph. 

The following procedure shall be used to assess rejection limits for a group of test results, where n is the number of results under consideration: 

- (a) Temporarily exclude the suspect value from the set of results and consider only the remaining results X 1… X i… X k 

   - where 

   - X i = the ith result 

   - k = the number of results remaining 

- (b) Calculate the natural logarithm, Y i = ln(X i), for each remaining result. 




- (c) Calculate the mean of the logarithms, Y m, and the standard deviation of the logarithms, Y s, as follows: 




The suspect value may be rejected if its logarithm is less than Y b or greater than Y u. When a value has been rejected it shall not be considered in any subsequent calculations. 



NOTE: Simultaneous horizontal displacement also applies. 

FIGURE B1 VERTICAL DISPLACEMENT OF WALL TIES UNDER TEST CONDITIONS 

## B11 CALCULATION OF CHARACTERISTIC VALUES 

NOTE: The characteristic value is that value above which 95% of results may be expected to lie. Any number of test results may be used with the appropriate equation, but the greater the number of test results, the more accurate and favourable the characteristic value is likely to be. 




B11.1 Abnormal test results A test result that has been rejected in accordance with Paragraph B10 shall be excluded from the set of results for analysis purposes, and the number, n, of the results in the set shall be reduced accordingly. 

B11.2 Characteristic strength The characteristic strength of the lot of wall ties shall be calculated from six or more individual test results, in both compression and tension, in accordance with Paragraph B11.3. 

B11.3 Evaluation of characteristic value The characteristic value for the ties being — evaluated shall be 

- ′ 


- ′ 


   - ′ 

   - n = number of test results in the set used to evaluate f 

   - f ′ = characteristic value for the ties represented by the set of specimens 

   - K k = characteristic value factor derived from Table B2, in which the coefficient of variation (V ) is determined in accordance with Paragraph B11.4. 

   - f spl = the least of the individual results in the set 

   - f ksp = the lower 5 percentile value for the set of test results, measured or assessed from a relative cumulative frequency distribution of those test data 

NOTE: The lower 5 percentile value for a given set of test results may be found as follows: 

n 10 Rank the test results f sp(1)… f sp(i)… f sp(n). Then f ksp = f sp[ ] 20     

For example, if n = 25, then f k sp = f sp(1.75) which is obtained by interpolating between f sp(1) and f sp(2). 

B11.4 Coefficient of variation The value of the coefficient of variation (V), defined as the standard deviation divided by the sample mean, shall be assessed as follows: 

- (a) Where n <30 

   - V = a value obtained from a sufficiently large supplementary body of data (containing not less than 30 relevant test results) that is representative of the type of tie. Unless otherwise substantiated by analysis of actual test data, the value estimated for V shall not be less than 0.2 for strength. 

- (b) Where n ≥30 

   - V = the coefficient of variation of the set of test results being evaluated. 




TABLE B2 

## DETERMINATION OF CHARACTERISTIC VALUE FACTOR 

|Number of test|||Characteristic|value factor (K|k)||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|results|||||||
|(n)|||Coefficient of variation (V)||||
||0.00|0.10|0.20|0.30|0.40|0.50|
|1|1.00|0.72|0.52|0.37|0.27|0.19|
|2|1.00|0.77|0.59|0.46|0.35|0.27|
|5|1.00|0.84|0.71|0.60|0.51|0.43|
|10|1.00|0.91|0.82|0.74|0.67|0.61|
|20|1.00|0.94|0.87|0.81|0.75|0.69|
|50|1.00|0.96|0.92|0.88|0.84|0.80|
|100|1.00|0.97|0.94|0.92|0.89|0.86|
|200|1.00|0.98|0.96|0.94|0.92|0.90|
|500|1.00|0.99|0.97|0.96|0.95|0.94|
|1000|1.00|1.00|1.00|1.00|1.00|1.00|



NOTES: 

- 1 Linear interpolation may be used. 

- 2 K k estimates the lower 5 percentile value of the population with a confidence of 0.75. 

- 3 The values for K k , as given in Table B2, have been determined as follows: 

   - (a) Where n ≥ 1000, K k = 1.00 

   - [V ] 




These expressions, used with the appropriate value of f ksp or f spl as set out in Paragraph B11.3, are essentially exact expressions for Weibull distributions and are conservative for other practical distributions. 

## B12 REPORT The following information shall be reported: 

- (a) Reference to this Standard, that is, AS/NZS 2699.1 

- (b) Identification of the test method. 

- (c) Identification of the lot of ties, including — 

   - (i) manufacturer; 

   - (ii) tie description including specification and drawings provided by the tie manufacturer. 

   - (iii) maximum cavity width; and 

   - (iv) source of the lot. 

- (d) Name of testing authority and the person responsible for the test. 

- (e) Date and location of test. 

- (f) Age of the specimens when tested. 

- (g) For each tie, strength in compression or tension, as applicable. 

- (h) For the lot — 

   - (i) characteristic strength in compression; 

   - (ii) characteristic strength in tension; and 




   - (iii) detailed information about any result that is considered to be abnormal, including the reasons for its non-inclusion in the assessment of the characteristic value. 

- (i) Any variation from standard testing procedure. 


   - Comments, if necessary 

- (k) Summary of results giving classification of tested item. 




## APPENDIX C 

## METHOD FOR DETERMINING THE DURABILITY CLASSIFICATION OF BARE TIES OR TIES WITH A METALLIC COATING 

(Normative) 

C1 SCOPE This Appendix sets out the method of testing for durability of a lot of bare (uncoated) ties or ties with a metallic coating (for example, galvanized). 

C2 PRINCIPLE Masonry couplets containing embedded wall ties are exposed to a simulated climate test, consisting of sequences of short-term salt spray and climatization. The ties are then examined to determine if the damage induced by the exposure is acceptable. 

NOTE: The duration of salt spraying is no more than 0.1% of the total test time. 

- C3 APPARATUS The following apparatus is required: 

- (a) Balance — capable of weighing each wall tie to an accuracy of ±0.0005 g or better. 

- (b) Carbonation chamber — capable of holding at least one specimen and a control couplet (typical conditions: 5% CO2, 60% RH, 20°C). 

- (c) Climate chamber — capable of holding at least one specimen under controlled humidity and temperature, and capable of supplying a controlled salt dose. 

C4 SAMPLE As a minimum requirement for a lot, six wall ties embedded in a masonry couplet, or spread over two or more couplets, shall be tested for corrosion resistance. A single specimen for corrosion testing is defined as consisting of six ties and couplet(s), as described in Paragraph C5. 

In the case of ties with a metallic coating, an additional three ties shall be selected from the given lot for determination of total coating mass (see Paragraph C6.4). 

An additional tie shall be sampled for control purposes as required by ASTM G1 (see Paragraph C6.3). 

The tie manufacturer shall provide to the testing authority a specification of the tie material, including the base metal type, coating type and coating mass or thickness. 

C5 PREPARATION OF SPECIMENS With the exception of some remedial ties not installed in mortar, each specimen shall be prepared using Type M3 mortar, in accordance with AS 3700 or NZS 4210, and masonry units of the same type to be used in practice or, where different types are used in practice, representative of the type likely to lead to the greatest corrosive attack. A maximum of six ties, three on one side and three on the other, shall be placed in the mortar bed (see Paragraph C6.1), in accordance with the requirements specified in Clause 2.6(e), during construction of the couplet(s). Any mortar shall be cleaned from protruding sections of the embedded ties. The prepared specimen shall be placed in a carbonation chamber for sufficient time to ensure that the mortar bed has completely carbonated, its pH being then not more than 8. 

NOTE: Complete carbonation would normally take two weeks in a 5% CO 2 chamber. 

To ensure that the bed is carbonated, a control couplet (that is, without ties) shall be placed in the chamber with the specimen or specimens and examined after the end of the carbonation period, by breaking this control couplet and applying an appropriate indicator to the interface, for example, phenolphthalein. If carbonation is complete on the control couplet, then testing may commence on the specimen. 

For remedial ties, the specimen shall be prepared to simulate the installation practice recommended by the tie manufacturer. 




## C6 PROCEDURE FOR CORROSION TESTING 

C6.1 Weighing Each tie shall have been weighed to the nearest 0.0005 g before embedment in the couplet and the mass recorded as mo. 

C6.2 Test procedure Following adequate carbonation, the specimen(s) shall be placed in a climate chamber and subjected to the following exposure sequence: 

- (a) Initial climatization period, 72 h at 90% RH and 30°C. 

- (b) Immediately following Step (a), initiate an uninterrupted short-term salt spray until such time as the salt deposited in the chamber is in accordance with the requirements set down in Table C1. Other details of spray conditions (for example, salt solution composition, pH of collected solution and collection rate) shall comply with AS 2331.3.1. 

- (c) Continue exposure of the specimen(s) in the same chamber at 90% RH and 30°C until seven days have elapsed from the commencement of the short-term salt spray. Monitor the temperature continually. Variations in humidity and temperature, except immediately following spray, shall not exceed ±5% RH and ±2°C. 

- (d) Repeat Steps (b) and (c) to give a total of six cycles. 

## TABLE C1 

## CLIMATE CHAMBER WEEKLY SALT DOSAGE 

|Corrosion<br>classifcation|NaCl deposited<br>(mg/m2) per spray<br>duration|NaCl deposited<br>(mg/m2) per spray<br>duration|Corresponding spray<br>duration (s) (See Note 1)|Corresponding spray<br>duration (s) (See Note 1)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
||Min.|Max.|Min.|Max.|
|R0|0|0|0|0|
|R1|35|45|25|30|
|R2|70|90|45|60|
|R3|200|220|130|145|
|R4|1050|1150|490|540|



NOTES: 

- 1 For guidance only. Spray rate for the quoted durations is 1.8 mL/h per 10 000 mm[2] . Each duration (in seconds) is dependent on the spray flow rate actually obtainable in practice and is determined from the first time the spray emerges from the nozzle. 

- 2 If difficulty is encountered in regulating the salt spray for R1 and R2, it is permissible to double the dosage which is then injected into the chamber every two weeks. 

C6.3 Examination When the procedure described in Paragraph C6.2 has been completed, each wall tie shall be removed from the couplet and any attached mortar shall be carefully cleaned off. 

Each wall tie shall be cleaned in accordance with ASTM G1 and then its mass recorded as m1 to the nearest 0.0005 g. The mass loss (mo − m1) shall be calculated. 

The surface area of the part of the tie embedded in the mortar shall be determined to within ±5 mm[2] . 

Bare (uncoated) metal wall ties shall also be examined with the naked eye, or with normal corrected vision, for evidence of pitting. 




C6.4 Total coating mass determination In the case of metallic coated ties, the coating mass of each of the three ties sampled for this purpose from the given lot shall be determined in accordance with an appropriate test method, such as is described in AS 1379, AS 2331.2.1 or AS/NZS 4534. 

The least value of coating mass shall be recorded. 


C7.1 General It is estimated that the exposure sequence described in Paragraph C6 is equivalent to 2½ years exposure in the field. The mortar bed remains alkaline for approximately the first five years of the design life and, thus, during the first five years significant corrosion does not occur. Ties therefore have to withstand an exposure of at least 17 times the equivalent test exposure. Acceptable damage during the durability test is de fined as less than 6% of the damage that ties can withstand without loss of function. In the case of metallic coatings, this implies that coating loss of the embedded section should be not more than 6% of the coating thickness. In the case of materials subject to pitting, such as stainless steel, it implies that no pitting is observed at the end of the test. 

C7.2 Interpretation of results for metallic coatings For metallic coatings, the mass loss of each tie tested shall be determined. From this, the mass loss per embedded area shall be determined on the assumption that all mass loss occurs on the embedded section of the tie, that is: 

mass loss per embedded surface area = 

total massloss of tie 

area of tie embedded in mortar 

The mean mass loss per embedded area of the six ties comprising each specimen shall be determined. If the mean mass loss per embedded area is less than 6% of the least value of total coating mass per area of the tie, as determined from Paragraph C6.4, then they shall be deemed to have passed the test. 

NOTE: It is important that the relativity of actual to specified-minimum coating mass be taken into account in assessing the durability classification. 

C7.3 Interpretation of results for bare (uncoated) metals The ties shall be deemed to — have passed the test if 

- (a) there is no evidence of pitting for materials subject to localized corrosion, for example, stainless steel; and 

- (b) the mean mass loss per embedded surface area, calculated using the equation given in Paragraph C7.2, does not exceed 1% of the mass of the tie per surface area of the tie. 

If requested by the tie manufacturer prior to completion of the simulated 2½ year exposure test, and in the event that the ties fail, the testing authority may provide a projection of the proportionate loss in structural function at the end of the design life. If the estimated degree of degradation through corrosion does not appear to be prejudicial to retention of adequate structural performance at the end of the design life, testing for strength and stiffness in accordance with Appendix A or Appendix B, as appropriate, may be carried out on the following ties: 

- (i) The corroded ties assessed in accordance with this Paragraph. 

- (ii) Ties removed from two further specimens prepared and treated in accordance with Paragraph C5 and Paragraph C6.2, except that one specimen shall have been exposed for a total of 12 cycles (Steps (b) and (c) of Paragraph C6.2) and the second specimen, exposed for 18 cycles. 

NOTE: 12 cycles is equivalent to approximately 5 years exposure, 18 cycles, to 7½ years. 




If the strength and stiffness extrapolated from the test results obtained on Items (i) and (ii), to the end of the design life, meet the requirements of this Standard, then the ties shall be deemed to meet the durability criteria of this Standard. 

## C8 RECORDS The following information shall be recorded: 

- (a) Identification of the sample and lot. 

- (b) Date and location of sampling. 

- (c) Number of ties tested. 

- (d) Identification of masonry units employed in the couplets. 

- (e) Dates of commencement and completion of test. 

- (f) The mass before testing, the mass after testing, the mass loss for each tie tested from the sample and the mean mass loss for the sample. 

- (g) Surface area of the embedded part of each tie corresponding to the mass loss recorded. 

- (h) Noting of any pitting on bare (uncoated) metal ties. 

- (i) For ties with metallic coating, the least actual coating mass and specified minimum coating mass. 

- (j) Test regime, for example, R4 

- C9 REPORT If a report is prepared, it shall include the following information: 

- (a) Reference to this Standard, that is, AS/NZS 2699.1. 

- (b) Identification of the test method. 

- (c) Identification of the lot, identification of the ties tested by way of a dimensioned drawing and the material used, and identification of the masonry units used. 

- (d) Number of ties tested. 

- (e) Date and location of sampling. 

- (f) Dates of commencement and completion of test. 

- (g) If the wall tie has passed the test, its classification for corrosion resistance. 

- (h) Summary of results. 

- (i) Name of testing authority, if applicable, and the name of the person responsible for the test. 




## APPENDIX D 

## METHOD FOR DETERMINING THE DURABILITY CLASSIFICATION OF STEEL WALL TIES WITH AN ORGANIC OR DUPLEX COATING 

## (Normative) 

D1 SCOPE This Appendix sets out the method of test for the durability of a given lot of steel wall ties with an organic or duplex coating. 

- D2 PRINCIPLE Wall ties are subjected to the following tests: 

- (a) Unembedded ties are tested for alkali sensitivity of organic coating. 

- (b) Masonry couplets containing embedded ties are exposed to a combination of continuous salt spray and climatization. As part of this test, an X is scribed through the organic coating to allow an assessment of the effect of damage occurring to the tie before installation. 

Ties are examined after each test to determine if the damage induced by the exposure is acceptable. 

The tests described in this Appendix are designed primarily to allow assessment of the susceptibility of organic coatings to deterioration from the corrosive and highly alkaline conditions encountered in service. The tests are not intended to establish the durability of any metallic component layer of a coating, nor of the basis metal. However, with the corrosion resistance test, if any red rust is noted, distant from the scribe, at the conclusion of salt spraying, this immediately indicates an inherent weakness in the organic coating, and — consequentially leads to 

- (i) rejection of ties with an organic coating; and 

- (ii) retesting of ties with a duplex coating in accordance with Appendix C, since conventional salt spray testing is not recognized as being a reliable arbiter of the corrosion resistance of metallic coatings. 

- D3 APPARATUS The following chemical reagent and apparatus are required: 

- (a) Solution of sodium hydroxide 

- (b) Carbonation chamber — capable of holding at least one prepared test specimen and a control couplet (typical conditions: 5% CO2, 60% RH, 20°C). 

- 

- (c) Salt spray chamber capable of holding at least one test specimen under controlled humidity and temperature, and of supplying a controlled salt dose. 

D4 SAMPLE At least one tie shall be tested for alkali sensitivity and at least six shall be tested for corrosion resistance, from a given lot. 

A further three ties shall be sampled from the lot for determination of coating mass or thickness (see Paragraph D6.5). 

For the corrosion resistance test, each specimen shall consist of six ties embedded in one or more masonry couplets, as described in Paragraph D6.2. 

The tie manufacturer shall provide to the testing authority a specification of the tie material, including the steel composition, coating constitution, and coating mass or thickness for an organic coating or both component layers of a duplex coating. 




D5 ALKALI SENSITIVITY TEST One or more ties shall be subjected to an alkali sensitivity test using a solution of sodium hydroxide to give a pH of 10 at the test − ° temperature of 20 25 C. 

The tie shall be deemed to have passed this test if the integrity of the coating has not been affected. 


D6.1 Preparation of ties The organic coating on each tie for the test specimen shall be scribed through to the metal substrate (steel or, in the case of duplex coatings, zinc) with an X, using a suitable implement such as a razor blade or scalpel, on both the surface to be embedded in mortar and the surface to be free of mortar. The combined length of the diagonals of each X shall be at least 50 mm. 

NOTE: Remedial ties usually do not involve the use of mortar. 

D6.2 Preparation of specimens With the possible exception of remedial ties, each specimen shall be prepared using Type M3 mortar, in accordance with AS 3700 or NZS 4210, and masonry units of the same type to be used in practice or, where different types are used in practice, representative of the type likely to lead to the greatest corrosive attack. A maximum of six ties, three on one side and three on the other, shall be placed in the mortar bed, in accordance with the requirements specified in Clause 2.6(e), during construction of the couplet(s). Any mortar shall be cleaned from protruding sections of the embedded ties. The specimen shall then be placed in a carbonation chamber for such time as to ensure that the mortar bed is completely carbonated, its pH then being not more than 8. 

NOTE: Complete carbonation would normally take two weeks in a 5% CO 2 chamber. 

To ensure that the bed is carbonated, a control couplet (that is, without ties), comprising the same type of masonry unit as for the specimen, shall be placed in the chamber with the specimen or specimens and examined after the end of the carbonation period, by breaking the control couplet and applying an appropriate indicator to the interface, for example, phenolphthalein. If carbonation is complete on the control couplet then testing may commence on the specimen or specimens. 

For remedial ties, the specimen shall be prepared to simulate the installation practice recommended by the tie manufacturer. 

D6.3 Test procedure 

D6.3.1 R3 test procedure The specimen(s) shall be placed in a salt spray chamber and subjected to a 500 h salt spray test in accordance with AS 2331.3.1, with a modi fication to the temperature of the chamber such that it is cycled from 25°C to 45°C to 25°C, ±5°C, at six-hourly intervals. 

D6.3.2 R4 test procedure The specimen(s) shall be placed in a salt spray chamber and subjected to a 1000 h salt spray test in accordance with AS 2331.3.1, with a modification to the temperature of the chamber such that it is cycled from 25°C to 45°C to 25°C, ±5°C, at six-hourly intervals. 

D6.4 Examination of ties When the test described in Paragraphs D6.3.1 or D6.3.2 has been completed, the ties shall be removed from the specimen(s) and all mortar carefully cleaned from them. 

The coated surface of each tie shall be assessed in accordance with the following: 

- (a) General appearance. 




The development of any red rust away from the influence of the scribe shall be recorded. 




D6.5 Determination of coating mass or thickness The organic coating mass or thickness for ties with an organic coating, or organic coating mass or thickness for ties with a duplex coating, of each of the three ties sampled for this purpose from the given lot, shall be determined in accordance with the appropriate test method specified in AS 3894.3. 

The coating mass or thickness considered least likely to provide adequate protection, from the three determinations, shall be recorded. 

D6.6 Interpretation of the results If the rating of general appearance, degree of corrosion of the metal substrate, degree of blistering, and degree of flaking and peeling is less than 3 in each case, the ties shall be deemed to have passed the test. 

An organic coating with a rating greater than 3 for any observation shall be deemed not to offer sufficient protection. It is then considered that the life of the tie is its life without the organic coating. 

The presence of red rust, detectable by visual inspection away from the effect of the scribe, shall result in rejection of the tie. 

In the case of duplex coatings that have failed either because a rating greater than 3 was obtained or because red rust was present away from the scribe, if ties equivalent to the original ties, but without the organic coating, are tested in accordance with Appendix C and for the same corrosion classification as applied in Paragraph D6.3, with successful results, then both these ties and the original ties shall be deemed to be satisfactory. If the ties without the organic coating fail the requirements of Appendix C, then both these ties and the original ties shall be rejected. 

NOTES: 

- 1 Retesting to Appendix C should only be undertaken with the agreement of the parties concerned. 

- 2 It is important that the relativity of actual to specified-minimum coating mass or thickness (excluding zinc) be taken into account in assessing the durability classi fication. 

## D7 RECORDS The following information shall be recorded: 

- (a) Identification of the tie and lot. 

- (b) Date and location of sampling. 

- (c) Details of specified and actual coating masses or thicknesses used in determination of durability classification. 

- (d) Numbers of ties subjected to the alkali sensitivity test and to the corrosion resistance test. 

- (e) Dates of commencement and completion of test. 

- (f) Assessment of alkali sensitivity test. 

- (g) Identification of the test regime, for example, R4. 

- (h) The following assessment in accordance with AS 1580.481.1.9, AS 1580.481.1.10 and AS 1580.481.3, and the ratings obtained: 

   - (i) General appearance. 

   - (ii) Degree of corrosion of coated metal substrate, including undercut corrosion. 

   - (iii) Degree of blistering. 

   - (iv) Degree of flaking and peeling. 

- (i) Noting of any rust development away from the scribe. 

- (j) Whether ties with duplex coating have been retested without the organic coating, in accordance with Appendix C, and the results of testing. 




- D8 REPORT If a report is prepared, it shall include the following information: 

- (a) Reference to this Standard, that is, AS/NZS 2699.1. 

- (b) Identification of the test method. 

- (c) Identification of the ties in the specimen by way of a dimensioned drawing, identification of the masonry unit used, and coating specification for the ties. 

- (d) Number of ties tested. 

- (e) Date and location of sampling. 

- (f) Dates of commencement and completion of test. 

- (g) If the wall tie has passed the alkali sensitivity test. 

- (h) The classification for durability from the corrosion resistance test. 

- (i) Summary of results. 

- (j) Name of testing authority, if applicable, and name of the person responsible for the test. 




## APPENDIX E 

## METHOD OF TEST FOR RESISTANCE TO WATER TRANSFER 

(Normative) 

E1 SCOPE This Appendix sets out the method of testing for resistance to water transfer across wall ties. 

E2 PRINCIPLE Ties are cleaned and coated before installation in a specimen to simulate their in-service condition. The specimen is placed in a testing apparatus which imposes a relative movement of the tie ends and subjects the ties to a controlled flow of water to simulate free water flowing down the inside face of the external leaf of a cavity wall or masonry veneer wall. The ties are observed to see whether water is transferred by them across the wall cavity. 

## E3 MATERIALS The following materials shall be required: 

- (a) Masonry units — unless otherwise specified, 230 mm × 110 mm × 76 mm solid or cored clay units, except that 70 mm wide masonry units shall be used for New Zealand conditions. 

- (b) Mortar — for clay units, type 1:2:9 (cement:lime:sand by volume); for concrete or calcium silicate units, type 1:0:5 with water thickener; and for AAC units, thin-bed mortar. 

- 

- (c) Timber spacer for cavity ties only, spacer cut to the width of the designated cavity. 

- 

- (d) Vapour-proof sheet sufficient to wrap the specimens. 

- (e) Structural member — for veneer ties only, 150 mm lengths of stud 90 mm × 35 mm in radiata pine No.1 framing grade or of equivalent stiffness stress grade F5, or 450 mm lengths of metal stud or other relevant structural member. 

- (f) Ties — as supplied by the manufacturer complete with the specified fasteners for timber, steel or other relevant material, as appropriate. 

- E4 APPARATUS The following apparatus shall be required: 

- (a) A testing apparatus having the essential features illustrated in Figure E1. 

- (b) A supply of clean tap-water. 

E5 SAMPLE A minimum of three ties from a given lot shall be tested. For ties that are not symmetrical on inversion and that do not have a designated top face, at least three separate ties shall be tested for both possible orientations. 


E6.1 Preparation Each test specimen shall contain no more than three ties, provided that they are separated from each other by at least 50 mm horizontally at their nearest points and provided that no part of any tie is closer than 25 mm to the end of a bed joint. 

Prior to installation, the ties shall be wiped clean and then dipped in a slurry consisting of 1 part of cement and 3 parts of fine sand mixed with water. The portion of the tie normally exposed in the cavity shall be completely covered with a thin coat of slurry, taking care not to allow excessive build-up in water drips or other features formed in the tie. Each coated tie shall be hung to dry for at least 24 h in laboratory air. 




## E6.2 Setting up of specimens for testing 

E6.2.1 For cavity ties The wall tiles shall be installed as follows: 

- (a) Place a timber batten, cut with its horizontal width equal to the designated cavity, and a vertical dimension not exceeding 50 mm, on a vapour-proof sheet on a horizontal surface. 

- (b) Set out masonry units, according to the number of specimens, along each side of the timber batten, with the heads of the units separated by approximately 13 mm. 

- (c) Place a bed of mortar on the units using a normal bricklaying action or, when thin-joint bedding is used, spread adhesive evenly across all units. 

- (d) Install the ties into the mortar bed or adhesive joint in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions or, if no specific instructions are provided, in accordance with accepted good practice. Install the ties in a position such that they are symmetrically placed on the units at right angles to the inside faces and fully embedded in the mortar or jointing material. 

   - NOTE: For solid or cored masonry units laid with mortar joints, accepted good practice is an embedment in accordance with the requirements of Clause 2.6(e). 

- (e) After not less than 1 min nor more than 4 min from the commencement of spreading of the bed, place the second course of masonry units, ensuring a uniform 10 mm joint thickness for a mortar bed or in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendation for thin-bed jointing. Strike off any excess mortar, including perpend joints. 

- (f) Wrap the specimens in the vapour-proof sheet and leave them undisturbed. 

- E6.2.2 For masonry veneer ties The wall tiles shall be installed as follows: 

- (a) Fix the ties in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations to short lengths of timber stud or short lengths of the relevant metal stud or structural member. 

- (b) Set out masonry units, according to the number of specimens, along a straight line upon a vapour-proof sheet on a horizontal surface, with the heads of the units separated by approximately 13 mm. 

- (c) Place a bed of mortar on the units using a normal bricklaying action or, when thin-joint bedding is used, spread adhesive evenly across all units. 

- (d) Install the ties into the mortar bed or adhesive joint in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions or, if no specific instructions are provided, in accordance with accepted good practice. Install the ties in a position such that they are symmetrically placed on the units at right angles to the inside faces and fully embedded in the mortar or jointing material. Ensure that the correct cavity width is maintained between the faces of the units and the studs to which the ties are attached. 

NOTE: For solid or cored masonry units laid with mortar joints, accepted good practice is an embedment in accordance with the requirements of Clause 2.6(e). 

- (e) After not less than 1 min nor more than 4 min from the commencement of spreading of the bed, place the second course of masonry units, ensuring a uniform 10 mm joint thickness for a mortar bed, or in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations for thin-bed jointing. Strike off any excess mortar, including perpend joints. 

- (f) Wrap the specimens in the vapour-proof sheet and leave them undisturbed. E6.2.3 For remedial ties Install the ties in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. 




E7 PROCEDURE The specimens shall be tested seven days after their manufacture, unless otherwise specified or indicated by the tie manufacturer. 

The test procedure for each specimen shall be as follows: 

- (a) Mount the specimen in the testing apparatus such that the tie is initially undeformed. 

- (b) Displace the inner leaf of the specimen down relative to the outer leaf, without rotation, as follows: 





- (c) Fill the header tank with water so that it overflows continuously. Ensure that a continuous film of water runs across the distribution plate. 

- (d) Adjust the rate of flow to 50 ±10 mL/s per metre of distribution width. Continue this ow for not less than 1 min. 

- (e) Examine the specimen for any evidence of water drops being transferred across the cavity by any of the ties. 

- E8 REPORT The following information shall be included in the report: 

- (a) Reference to this Standard, that is, AS/NZS 2699.1. 

- (b) Identification of the lot of ties, including — 

   - (i) manufacturer; 

   - (ii) tie description; 

   - (iii) cavity width tested; and 

   - (iv) source of the lot. 

- (c) Number of ties tested. 

- (d) Date and location of test. 

- (e) For each tie — 

   - (i) testing orientation (when applicable); 

   - (ii) displacements imposed in accordance with Step (b) of Paragraph E7; and 

   - (iii) whether water was transferred across the cavity during test. 

- (f) Summary of results giving classification (that is, pass or fail). 

- (g) Name of testing authority and the person responsible for the test. 





DIMENSIONS IN MILLIMETRES 

FIGURE E1 SCHEMATIC ARRANGEMENT FOR RESISTANCE-TO-WATERTRANSFER TEST 




## APPENDIX F 

## TEST TO IDENTIFY STAINLESS STEEL GRADE AS 1449/316 OR 316L 

(Informative) 

F1 GENERAL Stainless steel grade AS 1449/316 or 316L has been selected for corrosion classification R4 because of its superior resistance to attack by NaCl salt-laden moisture. Most other grades of stainless steel become pitted, and therefore weakened, on prolonged exposure to ionic chlorides. 

The application of a magnet, while ideal for separating ferritic stainless steels (such as grade 403, magnetic) from austenitic stainless steels (such as grade 316 or 316L, slightly magnetic in the cold-worked condition, otherwise non-magnetic), is useless for distinguishing grade 316 or 316L from other austenitic stainless steels, particularly the commonly used grade 304 which has poor chloride resistance. 

This Appendix describes a qualitative chemical test for the presence of molybdenum, the alloying element conferring upon grade 316 or 316L its superior resistance to chloride attack. 


F2.1 Solution A 5 g potassium thiocyanate (KSCN) dissolved in 100 mL water F2.2 Solution B 25 g stannous chloride (SnCl2.2H 2O) dissolved in 20 mL concentrated hydrochloric acid (HCl). 

Dilute to 100 mL with water. 

NOTES: 

- 1 The stannous chloride may not completely dissolve, leading to turbidity. However, it will perform satisfactorily. 

- 2 These chemicals are toxic, requiring that adequate precautions be observed in their use (for example, rubber gloves, face mask, non-ingestion, avoidance of skin contact). 

F3 TEST REQUIREMENTS A 12 V d.c. power source and a silver electrode (or probe), connected to its positive terminal, are required. The test electrolyte consists of 3 parts of Solution A, added to 1 part of Solution B. 

F4 TEST METHOD Ensure that the stainless steel test piece is clean and free of oil or grease. In some cases, a light wipe with a fine abrasive paper will be found beneficial. A small quantity (for example, a drop) of the test electrolyte (see Paragraph F3) is placed on the stainless steel. 

The negative terminal of the power supply is connected to the stainless steel test piece by a suitable means (for example, an alligator clip), while the end of the silver positive electrode is immersed in the electrolyte, ensuring that it does not make metal-to-metal contact with the test piece itself (that is, the very tip of the silver electrode should be insulated from the test piece). 

Apply the voltage for 2 or 3 seconds. The electrolyte will immediately turn red where the electrode has been inserted. 

If the red coloration persists for some time at the end of voltage application, then a stainless steel composition containing more than 1.5% molybdenum, such as grade 316 or 316L, is identi ed. 

NOTE: At least initially, persons employing the test are advised to compare the change in colour of the electrolyte on grade 316 or 316L stainless steel with that on a non-molybdenum-bearing steel. It will be found that a red coloration is also obtained with the latter, but the effect is much less distinct and the redness disappears within seconds. 




## APPENDIX G MINIMUM LABELLING REQUIREMENTS 

## (Informative) 

An example of labelling showing the recommended size of label and required minimum information for wall tie packages is shown in Figure G1: 

NOTE: Where steel ties are coated to achieve durability classi fication R5 (see Clause 2.4.4, Note 2) details of the coating, details of the design application, and expected life should also be shown on the label. 

|Name  of  manufacturer||AUSTRAL  TIE  MAKERS  P/L||
|---|---|---|---|
|||Geelong||
|Type||A||
|Category of wall tie||CAVITY||
|Classifcation of ties:||MEDIUM DUTY||
|Rated cavity width:||60 mm||
|Durability category||R3||
||AS/NZS 2699.1|||
||100 mm|||



FIGURE G1 LABEL EXAMPLE 




## APPENDIX H 

## MEANS FOR DEMONSTRATING COMPLIANCE WITH THIS STANDARD 

(Informative) 

H1 SCOPE This Appendix sets out the following different means by which compliance with this Standard can be demonstrated by the manufacturer or supplier: 

- (a) Evaluation by means of statistical sampling. 

- (b) The use of a product certification scheme. 

- (c) Assurance using the acceptability of the supplier’s quality system. 

- (d) Other such means proposed by the manufacturer or supplier and acceptable to the customer. 

H2 STATISTICAL SAMPLING Statistical sampling is a procedure which enables decisions to be made about the quality of batches of items after inspecting or testing only a portion of those items. This procedure will only be valid if the sampling plan has been determined on a statistical basis and the following requirements are met: (a) The sample shall be drawn randomly from a population of product of known history. The history shall enable verification that the product was made from known materials at essentially the same time, by essentially the same processes and under essentially the same system of control. 

- (b) For each different situation, a suitable sampling plan needs to be defined. A sampling plan for one manufacturer of given capability and product throughput may not be relevant to another manufacturer producing the same items. 

In order for statistical sampling to be meaningful to the customer, the manufacturer or supplier needs to demonstrate how the above conditions have been satisfied. Sampling and the establishment of a sampling plan should be carried out in accordance with AS 1199, guidance to which is given in AS 1399. 

H3 PRODUCT CERTIFICATION The purpose of product certification is to provide independent assurance of the claim by the manufacturer that products comply with the stated Standard. 

The certification scheme should meet the criteria described in SAA HB18.28 in that, as well as full type testing from independently sampled production and subsequent veri fication of conformance, it requires the manufacturer to maintain effective quality planning to control production. 

The certification scheme serves to indicate that the products consistently conform to the requirements of the Standard. 

H4 SUPPLIER’S QUALITY SYSTEM Where the manufacturer or supplier can demonstrate an audited and registered quality management system complying with the requirements of the appropriate or stipulated Australian or international Standard for a supplier’s quality system or systems, this may provide the necessary con fidence that the specified requirements will be met. The quality assurance requirements need to be agreed between the customer and supplier and should include a quality or inspection and test plan to ensure product conformity. 

Guidance in determining the appropriate quality management system is given in AS/NZS ISO 9000.1 and AS/NZS ISO 9004.1. 




H5 OTHER MEANS OF ASSESSMENT If the above methods are considered inappropriate, determination of compliance with the requirements of this Standard may be assessed by means of AS 3942 or from the results of testing or inspection coupled with the manufacturer’s guarantee of product conformance. 

Irrespective of acceptable quality levels (AQLs) or test frequencies, the responsibility remains with the manufacturer or supplier to supply products that conform with the full requirements of the Standard. 


## Standards New Zealand 

The first national Standards organization was created in New Zealand in 1932. The Standards Council of New Zealand is the national authority responsible for the production of Standards. Standards New Zealand is the trading arm of the Standards Council established under the Standards Act 1988. 

## Australian/New Zealand Standards 

Under an Active Co-operation Agreement between Standards Australia and Standards New Zealand, Australian/New Zealand Standards are prepared by committees of experts from industry, governments, consumers and other sectors. The requirements or recommendations contained in published Standards are a consensus of the views of representative interests and also take account of comments received from other sources. They reflect the latest scientific and industry experience. Australian/New Zealand Standards are kept under continuous review after publication and are updated regularly to take account of changing technology. 

## International Involvement 

Standards Australia and Standards New Zealand are responsible for ensuring that the Australian and New Zealand viewpoints are considered in the formulation of international Standards and that the latest international experience is incorporated in national and Joint Standards. This role is vital in assisting local industry to compete in international markets. Both organizations are the national members of ISO (the International Organization for Standardization) and the IEC (International Electrotechnical Commission). 

## Visit our Web sites 

www.standards.com.au www.standards.co.nz 


PO Box 1055 Strathfield NSW 2135 Administration 

Phone (02) 9746 4700 Fax (02) 9746 8450 Email mail@standards.com.au Customer Service 


> Internet www.standards.com.au 

Level 10 Radio New Zealand House 155 The Terrace Wellington 6001 (Private Bag 2439 Wellington 6020) Phone (04) 498 5990 Fax (04) 498 5994 Customer Services (04) 498 5991 Information Service (04) 498 5992 Email snz@standards.co.nz Internet www.standards.co.nz 

ISBN 0 7337 3023 X 

Printed in Australia 

