


## Australian/New Zealand Standard[™] 

## **Gas installations** 




_**STANDARDS NEW ZEALAND**_ **PAEREWA** _**AaTEAROA**_ 


## **AS/NZS 5601.2:2013** 

This Joint Australian/New Zealand Standard was prepared by Joint Technical Committee AG-006, Gas Installations. It was approved on behalf of the Council of Standards Australia on 20 August 2013 and on behalf of the Council of Standards New Zealand on 13 August 2013. 

This Standard was published on 16 September 2013. 

The following are represented on Committee AG-006: 

Association of Accredited Certification Bodies Association of Hydraulic Services Consultants Australia Australian Building Codes Board 

Department of Employment, Economic Development and Innovation, Qld Energy Networks Association Gas Appliance Manufacturers Association of Australia Gas Association of New Zealand Gas Technical Regulators Committee Gas Utilisation Institute LPG Association of New Zealand LPG Australia Master Plumbers & Mechanical Services Association of Australia Master Plumbers, Gasfitters and Drainlayers New Zealand Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment, New Zealand Plumbing Industry Commission The Australian Gas Association 

## **Keeping Standards up-to-date** 

Standards are living documents which reflect progress in science, technology and systems. To maintain their currency, all Standards are periodically reviewed, and new editions are published. Between editions, amendments may be issued. Standards may also be withdrawn. It is important that readers assure themselves they are using a current Standard, which should include any amendments which may have been published since the Standard was purchased. 

Detailed information about joint Australian/New Zealand Standards can be found by visiting the Standards Web Shop at www.saiglobal.com.au or Standards New Zealand web site at www.standards.co.nz and looking up the relevant Standard in the on-line catalogue . 

For more frequent listings or notification of revisions, amendments and withdrawals, Standards Australia and Standards New Zealand offer a number of update options. For information about these services, users should contact their respective national Standards organization. 

We also welcome suggestions for improvement in our Standards, and especially encourage readers to notify us immediately of any apparent inaccuracies or ambiguities. Please address your comments to the Chief Executive of either Standards Australia or Standards New Zealand at the address shown on the back cover. 

_This Standard was issued in draft form for comment as DR AS/NZS 5601.2._ 



# **Australian/New Zealand Standard[™]** 

## **Gas installations** 



## **COPYRIGHT** 







(J) "E "§_ C (J) .c :!: u (J) C ct! :::, Cl C 


## PREFACE 

This Standard was prepared by the Standards Australia/Standards New Zealand Committee AG-006, Gas Installations, to supersede AS/NZS 5601.2:2010. General gas installation AS/NZS 5601.1. requirements for other than caravans and boats can be found in 

The objective of this Standard is to provide essential requirements and deemed-to-comply solutions, to promote uniform standards of gas installation and to provide a stand-alone Standard for LP Gas installations in caravans and boats for non-propulsive purposes. 

This Standard is based on the general installation requirements of AS/NZS 5601.1. 

This Standard is not to be regarded as a design specification or an instruction manual for untrained persons. 

This Standard has no legal standing in its own right, but may acquire legal standing in either of the following circumstances: 

- (a) Where adopted by a Government or other authority having jurisdiction over relevant installations. 

- (b) Where adopted as part of an installation specification. 

Regulatory bodies (Technical Regulators) may adopt this Standard. 

Matters of an advisory or explanatory nature are indicated in the following manners: 

- (i) The word 'NOTE(S)' followed by a statement(s). 

- (ii) By inclusion in an informative appendix. 

- (iii) By the inclusion of them in examples, Warning or Caution statement. 

Terms or words that are indicated by italics in the body of the text are defined terms or words. This indication of italics does not apply to the text in the Preface, headings or Section 1 figures. contains the definitions of such terms or words as they apply to this Standard. 

All the Australian and New Zealand Technical Regulators agree that this Standard should provide for particular appliances and components to be certified. It was also agreed that this Standard include a statement that this requirement would not apply retrospectively. 

Section 2 of this Standard details the various aspects of a gas installation that contribute to its safety, stating performance criteria for compliance with legislative requirements for 3 to 9 safety of gas installations. Sections provide more detailed information as a means of compliance with the performance criteria. 

The means of compliance in Sections 3 to 9 are not the only means of compliance with the Section 2. performance criteria in 

Major changes from AS/NZS 5601.2:2010 include the following: 

- (A) Clarification of drainage and ventilation requirements for LP Gas cylinder compartments and lockers (see Clause 3.4. l(f . 

- (B) Clarification of refrigerator installations (see Clause 6.11.3). 

- (C) Guidance on increase in ventilation area where mesh is installed (see Clause 7.3.1). 

- (D) New warning label for vents (see Clause 7.4.4). 

- (F) Mandatory requirements for consumer instructions in Appendix G . 

- (G) New informative Appendix I for gas appliance commissioning. 

- (G) New informative Appendix J for symbols used in gas control system diagrams. 

> >, .0 u (J) rn rn (J) u 




- (H) New informative Appendix K with a gas installation checklist. 

The terms 'pipe', 'piping', 'tube' and 'tubing' are used throughout this Standard. They are to be considered to have the same meaning. 

Where the term 'installation' is used, it is deemed to include the appliances, flues, ventilation and other ancillary items. 

The terms 'normative' and 'informative' have been used in this Standard to define the application of the appendix to which they apply. A 'normative' appendix is an integral part of a Standard, whereas an 'informative' Appendix is only for information and guidance. 




## CONTENTS 

||CONTENTS|
|---|---|
||_Page_|
|SECTION 1 SCOPE AND GENERAL||
|SECTION 2 PERFORMANCE BASED DESIGN, INSTALLATION AND OTHER||
||ESSENTIAL REQUIREMENTS|
|SECTION 3 MEANS OF COMPLIANCE-CYLINDERS||
|SECTION_5_MEANS OF COMPLIANCE-PIPING AND FITTINGS||






(J) "E "§_ C (J) .c :!: u (J) C ct! :::, Cl C C  :5 u "E (J) u :::, 0 "<t C\I .0 (J) LL (.0 C\I C >­0 (? 0 ...J 0 z I 0 UJ I­ LL 0  ci5a: UJ > z 

z <( >, .0 u (J) rn rn (J) u 

_Page_ 

|_Page_|_Page_|
|---|---|
|SECTION 6 MEANS OF COMPLIANCE-GAS APPLIANCES||
|6.7|RESTRICTION ON INSTALLATION OF AN APPLIANCE ON A PETROL-|
|SECTION 7 MEANS OF COMPLIANCE-VENTILATION||
|SECTION 8 MEANS OF COMPLIANCE-FLUEING||
|SECTION 9 MEANS OF COMPLIANCE-TESTING AND COMMISSIONING||
|APPENDICES||







## SCOPE AND GENERAL 

||SECTION 1 - CONTENTS<br>SCOPE AND GENERAL|
|---|---|
||_Page_|






## STANDARDS AUSTRALIA/STANDARDS NEW ZEALAND 

## **Australian/New Zealand Standard** 

## **Gas installations** 

## Part 2: LP Gas installations in caravans and boats for non-propulsive purposes 

SECTION 1 SCOPE AND GENERAL 

## **1.1 SCOPE** 

This Standard provides the mandatory requirements and means of compliance for the design, installation and commissioning of _LP Gas installations_ in _caravans_ and _boats_ for non-propulsive purposes. 

## **1.2 APPLICATION** 

The terms _'caravan'_ and _'boat'_ are used to include various types of vehicle or marine craft. The user of this Standard is expected to be familiar with the properties and characteristics of _LP Gas_ and the principles of combustion, ventilation and flueing applicable to the safe installation and operation of _gas appliances ._ 

The requirements cover- 


- (b) mobile holiday homes, campervans and motor homes; 

- ( c) trucks and trailers incorporating fixed _gas installations;_ 

- (d) _boats;_ 


- (f) floating restaurants, whether fixed or mobile; and 

- (g) catering vehicles, whether self-propelled or towed. 

   - AS/NZS 5601.1. 

   - NOTE: Where commercial catering equipment is to be installed, refer to 

Where the term 'installation' is used it is deemed to include the pipework, _appliances,jlues,_ air ducts and other ancillary items. 

Section 2 of this Standard contains the mandatory performance requirements for the design, installation, and commissioning of _gas installations._ It includes, in Clauses 2.9 .1 and 2.10.1, some specific prohibitions, as the performance requirements cannot be reliably met if those prohibitions are breeched. 

Sections 3 to 9 of this Standard contain a means of compliance for installations designed to operate with a _gas_ supply _pressure_ not exceeding 3 kPa. In Australia, approval for any variation to the requirements of Sections 3 to 9 or the normative appendices may need to be obtained from the appropriate _Technical Regulator._ 

In New Zealand, the _Technical Regulator_ does not provide approvals for variations to the means of compliance in Sections 3 to 9. References to approval by the _Technical Regulator_ are not applicable to New Zealand. The installation certifier is responsible for ensuring that the installation, including any variations, meets the requirements in Section 2. 




(J) "E "§_ C (J) .c :!: u (J) C ct! :::, Cl C 



z <( 

For the application of this Standard in New Zealand only, where a Standard is cited as part of a means of compliance or in an Appendix, any Standard with equivalent performance requirements may be used as an alternative means of compliance. 

International System of Units (SI) is used in this Standard. 

NOTE: Appendix B provides a list of conversion factors for other commonly used units. 

## **1.3 EXCLUSIONS** 

This Standard does not apply to- 

- ( a) installations covered by statutory requirements such as the New Zealand Maritime Transport Act 1994 and the Australian Uniform Shipping Laws Code; 

- (b) the use of _LP Gas_ as a fuel for automotive or propulsion purposes; 

- ( c) installations in transportable homes and mobile classroom units; and 


   - NOTE: Where commercial catering equipment is to be installed, refer to AS/NZS 5601.1. 

## **1.4 NORMATIVE REFERENCES** 

The normative documents referenced in this Standard are listed in Appendix A. 

NOTE: Documents referenced for informative purposes are listed in the Bibliography. 

## **1.5 COMPLIANCE** 

The requirements of this Standard shall be used in conjunction with, but do not take precedence over, statutory regulations that may apply in any area. Where no requirement is given, good practice shall apply. In a matter of uncertainty, advice should be sought. This Standard applies to new installations, alterations and extensions commenced after its publication date or the date of adoption by the relevant _Technical Regulator._ It does not apply retrospectively to existing installations, but any repairs or modifications to existing installations shall comply with the requirements of this Standard. 

## **1.6 OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY** 

Only safe working practices shall be employed when working on _gas installations._ The process of installing _gas appliances_ shall take into consideration relevant occupational health and safety (OHS) requirements. These requirements pertain to all aspects of access, installation, operation and maintenance. Persons installing _gas appliances_ shall be aware of their responsibilities and be adequately trained and qualified in accordance with local OHS requirements. 



For the purposes of this Standard, the following definitions apply. 

## **1. 7.1 Accessible** 

Access can be gained without hazard or undue difficulty for inspection, repair, testing, renewal, or operational purposes. 

## **1. 7.1.1** _Readily accessible_ 

Access can be gained without hazard, undue difficulty, or use of a tool. 

>, .0 u (J) rn rn (J) u 






## **1.7.2 Appliance** 

In New Zealand, has the same meaning as _'gas appliance'_ in the Gas Act 1992. 

In Australia, an assembly, other than a vehicle refuelling _appliance,_ part of which uses _gas_ to produce flame, heat, light, power or special atmosphere. 

## **1.7.2.1** _Type A appliance_ 

An _appliance_ for which a _certification_ scheme exists (applicable in Australia only). 

## **1.7.2.2** _Type B appliance_ 

An _appliance,_ with _gas consumption_ in excess of 10 MJ/h, for which a _certification_ scheme does not exist (applicable in Australia only). 

## **1. 7 .2.3** _Flueless appliance_ 

An _appliance_ designed to operate without _ajlue._ 

## **1.** 7 **.2.4** _Freestanding cooking appliance_ 

A cooking _appliance,_ comprising an oven or ovens, a number of open _burners_ and usually a grill, which is designed to be installed on a floor. 

## **1. 7.2.5** _Room-sealed appliance_ 

An indoor _appliance_ which is sealed from the room in which it is installed so that it directly discharges _combustion products_ to, and takes air for combustion from, outside the caravan or boat. 

## **1.7.3 Authorized person** 

A person authorized under the legislation of the appropriate jurisdiction. 

## **1.7.4 Bedroom or sleeping area** 

A room or cabin used or intended to be used for sleeping including any combined living/sleeping area. 

## **1.7.5 Boat** 

Any seagoing or inland water craft including, but not limited to, a motorboat, yacht, cabin cruiser, launch, runabout, trailer-sailer, houseboat, motor-sailer or work-boat. 


A device that positions a flame in the desired location by delivering _gas_ and air to that location in such a manner that controlled, continuous combustion is accomplished. 


A structure that was designed or adapted to be moved from one place to another, whether towed or transported, which is intended for human habitation or use as a workplace, and includes a self-propelled recreational vehicle or mobile home. Included is any associated annex and the like, whether permanently or temporarily attached to or adjoining the main portion of the structure. 

NOTE: A large structure assembled in a factory and transported to a permanent location is not considered a _caravan,_ e.g., portable school classrooms or transportable homes. 


A device capable of detecting carbon monoxide (CO), and which provides an alarm signal. 

## **1. 7.9 Certified/certification** 


_In Australia,_ assessed by a _certifying body_ and having a certificate number to demonstrate compliance with a Standard. 





_In New Zealand,_ a product satisfying the performance requirements of the cited Standard or an equivalent Standard. 

## **1.7.10 Certifying body** 

A body acceptable to the _Technical Regulator_ that provides assurance of compliance of _appliances_ and components with nominated Standards and other accepted safety criteria. 

## **1.7.11 Combustible material** 

A material that will ignite and burn, and includes material that has been flame-proofed. 

## **1.7.12 Combustible surface** 

Any material or object made of, or surfaced with, materials that are capable of being ignited and burned. 

## **1.7.13 Combustion products** 

Constituents resulting from the combustion of a fuel with air, oxygen or mixture of the two, including the inert _gases_ associated with the fuel and the air but excluding any other diluent or contaminant. 

## **1.7.14 Competent person** 

A person or body who, through training, qualification or practical experience, or a combination of these, and understanding of the equipment and processes, is able to verify compliance with this Standard. 

## **1.7.15 Cylinder** 

A container for the storage of _LP Gas_ that has a capacity of more than 120 mL but not more than 500 L, and does not include an aerosol container. 

NOTE: Capacity is often referred to as 'water capacity' and is the total internal volume. 

## **1.7.16 Cylinder compartment** 

A compartment, an enclosed area or a partitioned-off space primarily used for the installing of a _gas cylinder, pressure_ regulator and other associated equipment. 

## **1.7.17 Deck (see Figure 1.1)** 

_boat_ A floor or platform extending from side to side of a and includes the following: 

- (a) _Upper deck_ That part of the decking designed to prevent water entering the hull of a _boat,_ generally at the gunwale line. 

- ([b] ) _Main deck_ The level immediately below the _upper deck._ 

- (c) _Lower deck_ The level immediately below the _main deck._ 



Cabin top<br>000<br>Upper deck<br>Main deck<br>Lower deck<br>Cabin top<br>



FIGURE 1.1 VIEWS OF BOAT SHOWING DECKS 




(J) "E "§_ C (J) .c :!: u (J) C ct! :::, Cl C 


## **1.7.18 DN (diametre nominale)** 

See _'nominal size'._ 

## **1.7.19 Exhaust fan** 

A mechanical device other than a _range hood_ for moving contaminated air from one interior space to another, or to outside of the space. 

## **1.7.20 Explosive limit** 

## **1.7.20.1** _Upper explosive limit (UEL)_ 

The upper percentage of _gas_ in air at which combustion can be self-sustaining at standard temperature and _pressure._ 

_LP Gas_ : nominal UEL 10% 

## **1.7.20.2** _Low explosive limit (LEL)_ 

The lower percentage of _gas_ in air at which combustion can be self-sustaining at standard temperature and _pressure._ 

_LP Gas_ : nominal LEL 2% 

## **1. 7.21 Fire resistant material** 

A material having thermal and physical properties suitable for use in protecting a _combustible surface,_ as specified in Appendix C. 

## **1. 7 .22 Flame safeguard system** 

A system consisting of a flame detector(s) plus associated circuitry, integral components, valves and interlocks, the function of which is to shut off the _gas_ supply to the _burner(s)_ in the event of ignition failure or flame failure. 

## **1.7.23 Flue** 

The passage through which _flue gases_ are conveyed from an _appliance_ to a discharge point. Types of _flue_ include: 

- (a) _Natural draught flue_ A _flue_ in which the draught is provided by the buoyancy effect of the hot _gases_ in it. 

- (b) _Open flue Aflue_ system containing a draught diverter or canopy. 

- ( c) _Power flue_ A _flue_ system in which _combustion products_ are removed from the _gas appliance_ by a fan in the _flue._ 

## **1. 7 .24 Flue cowl** 

A device placed at the end of a _flue_ designed to prevent the entry of rain and minimize the disturbing effect of wind while not hindering the discharge of _flue gases._ 

## **1. 7 .25 Flue gases** 

_Combustion products_ plus all diluents and contaminants. These include, where applicable, excess air, dilution air, process air and waste products from the process. 

## **1.7.26 Flue terminal** 

A point at whichflue _gases_ discharge from _aflue._ 

## **1. 7 .27 Gas consumption** 

The rate of energy consumed by an _appliance_ under specific conditions and usually expressed in megajoules per hour (MJ/h). 




(J) "E "§_ C (J) .c :!: u (J) C ct! :::, Cl C 



z <( 

>, .0 u (J) rn rn (J) u 

## **1.7.28 Gas detector** 

_LP Gas_ at An intrinsically safe electronic device capable of indicating the presence of specified concentrations, which provides an audible or visual warning. 

## **1. 7 .29 Gas installation** 

A combination of the following used or intended to be used in the supplying and utilization of _gas,_ taken as separate items or as a whole: _piping,_ fittings, components, _appliances, flues,_ apparatus or other devices and associated requirements. 

## **1.7.30 Gas/Liquefied petroleum gas (LP Gas)** 

A combustible _gas_ composed predominantly of any of the following hydrocarbons, or any combination of them, in the vapour phase: propane, propene (propylene), butane, butene (butylene ). 

## **1. 7 .31 Gas load** 

The total _gas consumption_ of all downstream _appliances._ 

## **1.7.32 Gas pressure regulator** 

A device that automatically regulates the outlet _pressure_ of the _gas_ passing through it to a predetermined value and includes the following: 

- (a) _Automatic changeover regulator_ A combination valve/gas _pressure regulator,_ fitted to an _LP Gas multiple-cylinder_ installation, which will automatically change over from a _cylinder(s)_ in use to a reserve _cylinder_ at a predetermined _pressure._ 

- (b) _Piping gas pressure regulator_ A _gas pressure regulator_ installed in the _piping_ to reduce the _gas pressure_ to a section of _piping._ 

- (c) _Cylinder regulator_ A _gas pressure regulator_ on a _cylinder_ installation that 1s subjected to the _gas pressure_ directly from the _cylinder._ 

## **1. 7 .33 Gas tight** 

Tested to the appropriate requirement and any _pressure_ drop or leakage rate does not exceed a limit specified by the _Technical Regulator._ The condition of a _gas installation_ or _gas_ pipework that meets the criteria of Appendix F. 

## **1.7.34 Hob** 

That part of a cooking _appliance_ that supports the _trivet,_ and is usually constructed of enamelled steel, stainless steel or toughened glass. 

## **1.7.35 Hose assembly** 

A flexible tube or pipe complete with end couplings. 

## **1. 7.36 Ignition source** 

A source of energy sufficient to ignite a flammable mixture and includes, but is not limited to, naked flames, exposed incandescent material, electrical welding arcs, and any electrical or mechanical equipment not suitable for use in hazardous locations. 

## **1.7.37 LP Gas locker** 

A fully enclosed compartment for the storage of _LP Gas cylinders_ and associated equipment. See _'cylinder compartment'._ 

## **1. 7 .38 Main run** 

The run of _piping_ from the outlet of the first _pressure_ regulator at the _LP Gas cylinder_ to the furthest _appliance_ position. 




(J) "E "§_ C (J) .c :!: u (J) C ct! :::, Cl C 



> >, .0 u (J) rn rn (J) u 

## **1. 7.39 Manual shut-off valve** 

A manually operated valve that allows an _appliance_ or a section of _piping_ to be shut off. 

## **1. 7.40 Manufacturer's specifications/instructions/recommendations** 

A document supplied with the _appliance_ or equipment that provides authoritative instructions on matters such as installation, commissioning, testing, maintenance and operation of the _appliance_ or equipment. 

## **1.7.41 May** 

Indicates the existence of an option. 

## **1.7.42 Nominal size/Nominal diameter (DN)** 

A numerical designation of size, in millimetres, which is common to all components in a _piping_ system other than components designated by outside diameters or by thread size. It is a convenient round number for reference purposes and is only loosely related to manufacturing dimensions. 

## **1.7.43 Operating pressure** 

The _gas pressure_ that the _piping_ or the _appliance_ is or will be subjected to under normal operating conditions. 

## **1.7.44 Outdoor(s)** 

An above-ground open-air situation with natural ventilation, without stagnant areas, and where _gas_ leakage and products of combustion are rapidly dispersed by wind and natural convection . 

NOTE: Appendix L provides diagrammatical representations of _outdoor_ areas. 

## **1.7.45 Oxygen-depletion sensor (ODS) or device** 

A device designed and installed to shut off the _gas_ supply to a _gas appliance_ when the oxygen content of the ambient air is depleted to a specified concentration. 


A short length of small bore copper pipe or a _hose assembly_ (to allow flexibility) used for the _high-pressure_ connection between an _LP Gas cylinder_ and the _cylinder_ regulator or the _cylinder_ manifold. 

## **1.7.47 Piping** 

A system of pipes, fittings, components and equipment, within the scope of this Standard, that conveys _gas_ from a _cylinder_ regulator to the _appliance_ inlet. 

## **1. 7.48 POL fitting (Prest-o-lite fitting)** 

The common name for a standard union with left-hand thread, used for connecting to an _LP Gas cylinder_ valve. 

## **1.7.49 Pressure** 

_Pressure_ above atmospheric _pressure,_ or gauge _pressure._ 

## **1.7.50 Proprietary system** 

A manufacturer-specific system using matched components, which may require special tools for installation. 

NOTE: _Proprietary systems_ may be incompatible with those of other manufacturers and may include _piping, flues,_ and fittings . 





## **1.7.51 Quick-connect device** 

A two-part mating plug and socket assembly for connecting a _gas appliance_ to a _gas_ supply without the use of tools. 

NOTE: _Quick-connect devices_ are sometimes referred to as 'bayonet fittings'. 

## **1.7.52 Range hood** 

A mechanical extraction unit to collect contaminated air from above a _gas_ cooking _appliance,_ pass the air through a filtration system and then either discharge it from the area or recirculate it back into the room. 

## **1. 7 .53 Rated working pressure** 

The maximum allowable inlet _pressure_ of any _gas appliance,_ or pipe fitting, or any section of _gas_ pipework. 

## **1.7.54 Room-sealed appliance** 

See _'Appliance'._ 

## **1. 7.55 Safety shut-off valve** 

A valve within a safety shut-off system that stops _gas_ flow. 


Indicates that a statement is mandatory. 

## **1.7.57 Should** 

Indicates a recommendation. 

## **1.7.58 Technical Regulator** 

The government appointed person, body or authority that has jurisdiction over _gas_ safety legislation ( or other entity authorized by that person, body or authority). 


A grid located over the open _burners_ of a _gas_ cooking _appliance_ to support vessels being heated. 

## **1.7.60 Vent line** 

A pipe that is connected to a _gas pressure regulator,_ relief valve or a safety shut-off system, and will convey escaping _gas_ to a safe location. 

## **1.7.61 Water heater** 

An C . _appliance_ for the supply of water at a temperature not exceeding 99[°] 








## PERFORMANCE BASED DESIGN, INSTALLATION AND OTHER ESSENTIAL REQUIREMENTS 

|||<br>REQUIREMENTS|
|---|---|---|
|||_Page_|








|||_Page_|
|---|---|---|







(J) "E "§_ C (J) .c :!: u (J) C ct! :::, Cl C 


SECTION 2 PERFORMANCE BASED DESIGN, INSTALLATION AND OTHER ESSENTIAL REQUIREMENTS 

## **2.1 GENERAL** 

Where _gas installations_ are designed based on the performance requirements of this Section, rather than by using the means of compliance under Sections 3 to 9, the level of safety, convenience and efficiency of operation shall be not less than an installation carried out according to Sections 3 to 9. Such designs shall be capable of being independently Section 2 verified. Any justification for compliance using shall be documented and kept for 7 years. 

NOTES: 

- 1 The _Technical Regulator_ may require to be consulted prior to work commencing. 

- 2 Written design specification and drawings together with justification for the deviation of the means of compliance may be required by the _Technical Regulator._ 

- 3 Where the installation is of a complex nature, the _Technical Regulator_ may require the design to be verified by a suitably qualified professional engineer. 

- 4 See Appendix J for a list of symbols for use in diagrams of _gas_ control systems. 

## **2.2 GENERAL WORK** 

## **2.2.1 Verification of gas supply** 

Before commencing an installation, the _LP Gas_ type and _pressure_ shall be verified to ensure the _gas_ is- 

- ([a] ) suitable and safe for the _gas appliances_ and pipe fittings to be installed; and 

- (b) available at an adequate flow rate to meet the anticipated maximum _gas load._ 

## **2.2.2 Work on a gas installation** 

Any _gas installation,_ or part affected, that contains _gas_ shall be isolated and, if necessary, safely purged before any gasfitting commences on that _gas installation._ 

During work on the _gas installation,_ all parts of an unattended _gas installation_ shall be left in a safe condition. 

All air and contaminants shall be purged from the _piping_ after work on the _piping_ has been completed, and before any attempt to commission the _gas installation_ or operate any connected _gas appliance ._ 

_Piping_ shall be free of debris or other harmful material before that _piping_ is connected to a _gas appliance._ 

Immediate steps shall be taken to make safe any unsafe _gas installation_ or _gas appliance_ that may be discovered. The consumer or operator shall be notified. 

NOTES: 

- 1 In New Zealand, the Gas (Safety and Measurement) Regulations 2010 require that when a licensed person has reasonable grounds to believe that an installation presents an immediate danger to life and property they shall notify the owner or occupier of the property and the _Technical Regulator._ 

- 2 In Australia, the _Technical Regulator_ may require to be informed. 

> >, .0 u (J) rn rn (J) u 






z <( 

>, .0 u (J) rn rn (J) u 

## **2.2.3 Sealing of open ends** 

All open ends of _piping_ and outlets intended for future connections of _gas appliances_ shall be suitably sealed to be _gastight_ and prevent ingress of deleterious materials. 

NOTE: The closing of a valve will not satisfy this requirement unless the outlet of the valve is sealed. 

## **2.2.4 Testing of gas installations** 

_Gas installations_ shall be tested and confirmed to be _gastight_ before connection to the _gas_ supply. 

## **2.2.5 Acceptable substances for testing** 

Air, the _gas_ for which the system is designed, or an inert _gas_ shall be the only substances used within _piping_ for testing purposes. Oxygen is not to be used as a substitute for air. 

## **2.2.6 Methods of locating gas leaks** 

Soap and water solution applied externally or other suitable _gas_ detecting equipment shall be the only methods used to locate a _gas_ leak. Naked flames shall not be used. 

(J) "E "§_ C (J) .c :!: u (J) C ct! :::, Cl C 

CAUTION: THE AMMONIA PRESENT IN SOME SOAPS AND DETERGENTS CAN REACT WITH BRASS FITTINGS AND CAUSE SUCH FITTINGS TO CRACK AFTER A SHORT PERIOD OF TIME. CAUTION SHOULD THEREFORE BE EXERCISED WHEN USING SOAP SOLUTIONS ON BRASS FITTINGS, AND ALL CONNECTIONS SHOULD BE RINSED THOROUGHLY WITH FRESH WATER AS SOON AS POSSIBLE AFTER THE APPLICATION OF THE SOAP SOLUTION . 


Every _gas installation,_ or part of a _gas installation,_ that is permanently decommissioned shall be physically disconnected from the _gas_ supply, purged and sealed. 

## **2.3 LP GAS CYLINDERS** 

## **2.3.1 Cylinders** 

_Cylinders_ and _cylinder_ valves shall be suitable for their purpose and for the environment in which they are used. 

In Australia, _cylinders_ shall comply with AS 2030.1. 

NOTE: In New Zealand, _cylinders_ are required by the Hazardous Substances (Compressed _Gases)_ Regulations 2004 to be of a registered type. 

## **2.3.2 Corrosion** 

_Cylinders_ should be protected from corrosion. 

## **2.3.3 Cylinder orientation** 

A _cylinder_ shall be installed upright unless specifically designed for horizontal installation with vapour withdrawal. 

## **2.3.4 Use of in-situ fill cylinders in boats** 

In-situ fill _cylinders_ shall not be installed in a _boat_ unless it can be demonstrated that by its design or location _LP Gas_ vapour cannot enter or accumulate in or on the _boat._ 

## **2.3.5 Multi-cylinder installations** 

In _multi-cylinder_ installations, service and reserve _cylinders_ shall be connected to a common manifold fitted with non-return valves, or changeover valves, which permit one _cylinder_ to be removed without shutting down the system. 

NOTE: Solenoid valves may be used if suitably rated. 





## **2.4 LOCATION OF LP GAS CYLINDERS** 

## **2.4.1 Restriction on location of cylinders** 

_LP Gas cylinders_ shall not be installed nor shall provision be made for installing or storing any _LP Gas cylinders_ inside any _caravan_ or _boat_ except as permitted in Clause 3.4.5.1. 

## **2.4.2 Required clearances around a cylinder** 

Sufficient clearance shall be maintained to ensure adequate separation from _ignition sources._ 

## **2.4.3 Mounting and stowage** 

_LP Gas cylinders_ and all high _pressure piping_ shall be located in a position which is protected from impact and minimizes the risk of _LP Gas_ entering the interior of the _caravan_ or _boat._ 

## **2.4.4 Cylinder restraint** 

shall be restrained to restrict movement of the and their attachments. _Cylinders cylinders_ 

## **2.5 CYLINDER COMPARTMENTS AND LP GAS LOCKERS** 

## **2.5.1 Design and construction** 

_Cylinder compartments_ and _gas_ lockers shall be designed and constructed to­ 

- ( a) be of adequate size to house the _cylinders_ and their associated equipment; 

- (b) allow safe removal and reconnection and be capable of securing the _cylinder/s;_ and 

- ( c) allow sufficient ventilation of the compartment or locker to prevent buildup of _LP Gas_ in case of a leak. 

_Cylinder compartments_ and _gas_ lockers shall be constructed of a material that is water and corrosion resistant. 

## **2.5.2 Identification of cylinder compartment or LP Gas locker** 

_Cylinder compartments_ and lockers shall have durable identification on the outside indicating the storage of _LP Gas._ 

## **2.6 MATERIALS AND FITTINGS** 

## **2.6.1 Material and components to be suitable** 

Materials, fittings and components shall be free of damage and defects. 

Materials, fittings and components selected for a _gas installation_ shall be compatible and suitable for use with- 


- (b) the _pressure_ to which they may be subjected; and 

- ( c) the environment in which they will be installed. 

## **2.6.2 Proprietary systems** 

_Proprietary systems_ shall be suitable for their intended use and shall be installed as a complete entity in accordance with the relevant _manufacturer's instructions._ 

## **2.6.3 Jointing** 

All interconnecting materials of jointed fittings and _piping_ shall be compatible. Jointing compounds and sealing materials shall be suitable for their application. 






## **2.6.4 Condition of pipe and fittings** 

Pipe and fittings shall be clear and free from cutting burrs, defects in structure or threading, cutting oil or grease, weld or braze deposits, flux residues and other such contaminants. 

## **2.6.5 Prohibition of earthing through piping** 

_Piping_ shall not be used as an earth for any electrical supply system. 

NOTE: This Clause does not preclude the application of equipotential bonding in accordance with AS/NZS 3000. 

## **2.6.6 Condition of pipe during installation** 

Precautions shall be taken to prevent the entry of dirt or other foreign matter from entering the pipe during installation. 

## **2.6. 7 Restriction on use of thread sealant** 

Thread sealant, or any other sealing material, shall not be applied to a compression joint. 

NOTE: A compression joint includes a flare, a union, and a POL connection to a _cylinder_ valve. 

## **2.6.8 Bending pipe** 

Every bend and offset in a pipe shall be free from any buckle, crack, or other evidence of physical damage to the pipe or its protective coating. 

## **2.7 PIPING** 

## **2.7.1 General** 

_Piping_ shall be designed and installed to- 

- ([a] ) convey _gas_ at a predetermined _pressure_ and volume; 

- (b) avoid leakage of _gas;_ and 

- ( c) avoid damage by corrosion, stress or other means. 

_Piping_ shall be installed in a manner that does not adversely affect the structural strength and fire resistance of any craft or vehicle. 


_Piping_ shall be- 

- ( a) designed to ensure an appropriate _gas_ velocity to minimize adverse impacts; 

- (b) installed to avoid any obstruction to the _gas_ flow; and 

- ( c) installed to safely supply an adequate flow of _gas_ at the _pressure_ required or reasonably foreseen. 

## **2.7.3 Pipe size** 

The diameter(s) of _piping_ shall be sufficient to ensure adequate _gas_ supply to the _appliance(s)_ and shall be determined by calculation using recognized formulae, tables or graphical methods. 

## **2.7.4 Pipe size for piping supplying a Type A appliance** 

The diameter of _piping,_ intended to supply a _Type A_ or domestic-type _appliance,_ shall be such that the minimum _pressure_ of 2. 7 5 kPa is available at the _appliance_ inlet. 

The minimum _pressure_ shall be available at each _appliance_ with all _appliances_ connected to the _piping_ operating at maximum _gas consumption ._ 






## **2.7.5 Location** 

_Piping_ shall- 

- ([a] ) be installed in a manner and in a location that protects it from damage; 

- (b) be designed and located to avoid any hazardous buildup of _gas_ if leakage occurs; 

- ( c) not be placed in any location where it would prejudice egress from a _boat_ or _caravan_ in an emergency, or interfere with any emergency response; 

- ( d) be sufficiently clear of other services to ensure they can be safely operated and maintained and to minimize any hazard arising from the failure of either the _gas piping_ or any other service; and 

- ( e) when passing through partitions, be installed in a manner that avoids any escaping _gas_ passing from one space to another. 

## **2. 7.6 Support of piping** 

_Piping_ shall be securely supported throughout its length and appropriately restrained to minimize stress from differential movements, with particular regard to those caused by vibration and flexing effects. 


_Piping_ shall be suitably protected from corrosive environments and galvanic corros10n potentials. 

## **2.7.8 Gas pressure regulator** 

A suitable _gas pressure regulator_ shall- 

- ( a) be installed wherever the _pressure_ supplied to any part of a _gas installation_ may exceed the _rated working pressure_ of that part; 

- (b) where installed, provide and maintain adequate control of the _operating pressure_ to all parts of the _gas installation_ that they are intended to control; and 

- ( c) be positioned in a safe location, _readily accessible_ for maintenance and adjustment. 

## **2. 7.9 Over-pressure protection** 

_Over-pressure_ protection shall be provided to ensure a safe situation exists in the event of malfunction or failure of any _pressure_ control device . 

## **2. 7.10 Pressure test points** 

A _pressure_ test point shall be provided to ensure all parts of the _gas installation_ can be safely tested, purged, commissioned, operated and maintained. 

## **2.7.11 Gas venting** 

_Gas_ venting devices, vents or _vent lines_ shall be installed to ensure vented _gas_ discharges freely to a safe location. Spaces that contain _gas_ venting devices shall either be ventilated to prevent any hazardous accumulation of _gas_ or be free from all sources of ignition. Any _vent line_ shall not affect the performance of the device or _gas installation_ to which it is connected and shall terminate at a safe location. 

## **2.8 FLUES** 

## **2.8.1 General** 


Every _gas appliance_ that requires _ajlue_ for safe operation shall be fitted with _ajlue. Flues_ shall be designed and installed to safely discharge _combustion products_ from all connected _appliances._ The construction of a _flue_ shall in no way impair the design strength or the fire resistance of the _boat_ or _caravan._ 






## **2.8.2 Design** 

_Flues_ shall be appropriately designed, constructed and installed to permit all connected _appliances_ to operate safely and effectively, taking into account the types of _appliance_ be connected, their location and energy input. 

If condensate is likely to accumulate, a suitably designed and _accessible_ means of safely draining the _flue_ shall be provided. 

## **2.8.3 Materials** 

Only suitable materials and jointing methods shall be used for the construction of the _flue._ 

## **2.8.4 Installation** 

_Flues_ shall be supported independently of the _gas appliance_ unless the _gas appliance_ has been designed to support the weight of the _flue._ 

_Flues_ shall be suitably fastened to a robust structure capable of ensuring stability and to prevent stressing of joints. 

Any penetration of the _boat_ or vehicle shall be sealed to prevent ingress of water. 

## **2.8.5 Location** 

The _boat_ or vehicle shall be suitably protected from the thermal effects of _flues._ 

_Flues_ shall be located to prevent damage or interference to or by any other utility or service. 

## **2.8.6 Flue terminals** 

_Flue terminals_ shall be- 

- ( a) constructed of material suitable for the environment; 

- (b) constructed to prevent ingress of any material or substance that could impair the performance of either the _flue_ or any connected _gas appliance;_ 

- ( c) constructed to prevent ingress of any material or substance that could impair the performance or place at risk the safety or integrity of the _boat_ or vehicle; 

- ( d) located to minimize entry of _combustion products_ into any _boat_ or vehicle and to minimize the effects of adverse draught on the performance of the _gas appliance;_ and 

- ( e) located so as to prevent harm to persons. 

## **2.9 INSTALLING GAS APPLIANCES** 

## **2.9.1 Prohibition on installation** 

Except as provided below, the following _appliances_ and equipment shall not be installed inside a _caravan_ or _boat:_ 

- (a) An _appliance_ which is designed to operate on an unregulated _gas_ supply or at a _pressure_ exceeding 2.75 kPa. 

- (b) In Australia, a _water heater,_ other than a room-sealed type. 



- In New Zealand, _water heaters_ other than room-sealed types shall only be installed in _caravans_ or _boats_ subject to the following requirements: 

- (i) The input of any flueless _water heater_ shall not exceed 0.4 MJ/h/m[3 ] of room volume (100 W/m[3] ). 

- (ii) Flueless _water heaters_ shall not be fitted underneath projecting shelves or cupboards, nor with a clearance less than 150 mm from side walls, and the _flue terminals_ shall not be less than 300 mm below ceilings. 





   - (iii) Instantaneous _water heaters_ shall not be installed in bedrooms or areas used for sleeping unless the _water heater_ is of the room-sealed type. There shall be no ventilation openings or other connections between any area used for sleeping and any compartment in which an instantaneous _water heater_ is located if the _water heater_ is not of the room-sealed type. 

      - NOTE: An area used for sleeping includes any combined living/sleeping area. 

- (c) A space heater, other than a room-sealed type, and see Note below. NOTE: In Australia, for a space heater installation on a houseboat, the _Technical Regulator_ should be contacted, as a flueless space heater may be permitted in the living area of the houseboat where the area can be isolated from the _sleeping area._ The heater needs to be fitted with a flame safeguard, tilt safety switch and _oxygen depletion device._ The maximum _gas_ consumption of the heater is not to exceed 0.2 MJ/h for each cubic metre of room volume. 

## **2.9.2 Pre-installation** 

_Gas appliances_ shall be checked before they are installed to ensure they are suitable to operate on the _gas_ being supplied. 

## **2.9.3 General installation requirements** 

General installation requirement are as follows: 

(J) "E "§_ C (J) .c :!: u (J) C ct! :::, Cl C 

- (a) _Gas appliances_ and equipment shall be installed m accordance with the written _manufacturer's instructions._ 

- (b) The space in which a _gas appliance_ is installed shall be ventilated to the extent required to ensure the safe and effective operation. 

- ( c) _Gas appliances_ shall be installed so that their operation is not affected by the operation of mechanical devices used to displace air, either within the same space or within a connected space. 

- ([d] ) All _manufacturer's instructions_ accompanying the _gas appliance_ shall be given to the owner or occupier of the _boat_ or vehicle in which the _gas appliance_ is installed. 

- (e) Consumer instructions shall include the information specified in Appendix G. 

- (f) _Gas appliances_ shall be installed so that adjacent _combustible surfaces_ do not exceed 65[°] C above ambient during operation. 

- (g) _Gas appliance_ shall be connected to existing _gas piping_ only if that _gas appliance_ does not affect the safety or effectiveness of any existing connected _gas appliance._ 

- (h) Any safety device or system that permits a _gas appliance_ to be operated remotely, automatically or unattended shall be of a type that ensures the _gas appliance_ fails safe . 

- (i) Electrical supplies to _gas appliances_ shall have a _readily accessible_ and identifiable means of isolation located adjacent to the _appliance._ 

- U[)] _Gas appliances_ shall be suitably supported or secured to prevent stressing of the _gas piping_ unless the _gas piping_ has been specifically designed and constructed to safely support the _gas appliance._ 

- (k) An _appliance_ shall be in an _accessible_ location with sufficient clearances to allow access to, and removal of, all serviceable components. 

   - NOTE: Removal of a panel or door to give access to a control compartment is acceptable. 

- (1) An _appliance_ shall be supported and secured so that the strain on any pipe connection is minimized . 

   - NOTE: The weight and normal operation of the _appliance_ needs to be considered in meeting this requirement. 

>, .0 u (J) rn rn (J) u 




(J) "E "§_ C (J) .c :!: u (J) C ct! :::, Cl C 


z <( 

- (m) Where the _appliance manufacturer's instructions_ direct that an _appliance_ be secured, the means of securing shall be suitable for the conditions of use. 

- (n) An _appliance_ shall not cause a hazard to walls, nearby surfaces, curtains, furniture or opened doors, and shall not obstruct the free movement of persons. 

- ( o) An _appliance_ shall not be installed in a location where it may ignite flammable vapours or materials or where chemicals may combine with combustion air and cause corrosion or malfunction of the _appliance._ 

   - NOTE: Such materials include some cleaning solvents and some chemicals used in dry­ cleaning processes. 

## **2.9.4 Requirements for gas appliances** 

## **2.9.4.1** _New Zealand requirements_ 

The _gas appliance_ shall be checked to ensure that the _gas appliance_ markings and instructions indicate that it is designed to operate on the _gas_ to be supplied to the installation and at the range of _pressures_ supplied. 

or NOTE: Gas (Safety and Measurement) Regulations 2010 cover requirements for _certification_ approval of _appliances._ 

## **2.9.4.2** _Australian requirements_ 

_Type A appliances_ shall comply with the current appropriate specifications, standards of performance and _certification_ requirements. The _appliance_ shall be suitable for the type of _gas_ to be connected and- 


- (b) be acceptable to the _Technical Regulator._ 

_Type B appliances_ shall comply with the requirements of AS 3814 and be acceptable to the _Technical Regulator._ 

Before a second-hand _gas appliance_ is installed, the _appliance_ shall satisfy the safety requirements of the _Technical Regulator._ 

## **2.9.5 Gas appliance location** 

shall be located to- _Gas appliances_ 

- ( a) avoid or be suitably protected against the effects of corrosive and/or physical damage; 

- (b) permit functional adjustment, safe ignition, access for operation and maintenance; 

- ( c) avoid any hazard to the _boat_ or vehicle, or to the contents of the _boat_ or vehicle; 

- ( d) avoid undue restriction of the movement of persons; 

- ( e) minimize the risks associated with the storage, use or release of hazardous or flammable substances in the vicinity or be suitably protected; and 

- (f) minimize the risk of harm to persons. 

A _gas appliance_ shall be installed only in a location or on a structure capable of supporting the weight of the _gas appliance._ 

## **2.9.6 Ventilation of the gas appliance space and air supply** to **gas appliances** 

Ventilation shall ensure proper operation of the _gas appliance_ and flueing system and maintain safe ambient conditions. 

The air supply to _gas appliances_ shall be adequate to provide complete combustion of the _gas._ 

The air supply to _gas appliances_ shall be free of any substance that could adversely affect the safe operation or durability of the _gas appliance._ 

>, .0 u (J) rn rn (J) u 





> >, .0 u (J) rn rn (J) u 

Where the required air supply relies on a mechanical system, the _gas installation_ shall include a suitable interlock to prevent the operation of the _gas appliance_ if the mechanical air supply system fails. 

## **2.9. 7 Gas appliance connection and isolation** 

A suitable means of disconnection from the _piping_ shall be provided for all _gas appliances._ 

In Australia only, a shut-off valve shall be provided on the inlet connection of an _appliance._ The valve shall be _accessible_ for operation. 

## **2.9.8 Commissioning** 

Every _gas appliance_ shall be commissioned upon installation to ensure safe start-up and operation, and shall include checks of safety and operating controls. 

NOTES: 

- 1 See Appendix I for guidelines for _gas appliance_ commissioning. 

- 2 See Appendix K for a checklist for checking compliance of the installation prior to and during commissioning. 

## **2.10 MATERIALS AND COMPONENTS-GENERAL** 

(J) "E "§_ C (J) .c :!: u (J) C ct! :::, Cl C 

## **2.10.1 Prohibited fittings** 

The following fittings or jointing systems shall not be used in _piping:_ 

- (a) Croxedjoints. 

- (b) Compression fittings with non-metallic olives. 

- ( c) Compression fittings with metallic olives if not approved for use with _gas_ in the _manufacturer's instructions._ 



- (f) Plain nipples, e.g., running nipples with parallel threads, except where no practical alternative is available. 

NOTE: A brass external parallel thread to a brass internal parallel thread may be used, provided the joint is welded or a suitable permanent quick-setting thread compound is used and a means of disconnection is provided immediately downstream. Wherever possible, the fitting should be secured against disturbance. 

## **2.10.2 Fire resistant material** 

_Fire resistant material_ shall comply with the requirements of Appendix C. 

## **2.10.3 Flue materials** 

Only suitable materials and jointing methods shall be used for the construction of the _flue._ 

## **2.10.4 Jointing compounds and materials** 

Jointing compounds and materials shall be suitable for the intended use. 

## **2.11 HOSE ASSEMBLIES** 

## **2.11.1 General** 

_Hose assemblies_ shall be of a minimum practicable continuous length and installed so that- 

- (a) they are protected from exposure to ultraviolet light; and 

- (b) the possibility of damage by rodent attack is minimized. 





## **2.11.2 Use of a hose assembly** 

In general, other than for _hose assemblies_ between _cylinders_ and regulators, _hose assemblies_ shall be used only between the regulator and rigid _piping,_ and between rigid _piping_ and _appliances._ Flexible hose shall be one continuous length and as short as practicable for the intended application in order to prevent kinking and damage to the hose. Flexible hose inside a caravan or boat shall be accessible. The connection of _hose assemblies_ to each other is not permitted. 

For _caravans_ with a slide out section (e.g., for additional living space), a _hose assembly_ is permitted between the rigid _piping_ of a caravan and the rigid _piping_ of the slide out section. 

_accessible_ Where the flexible hose is concealed (e.g., behind an panel), information shall be supplied with the _caravan_ instructions that state its location and the need for regular inspection by a _competent person._ 

NOTE: For _boats,_ hoses may be used for a _one-appliance_ installation as corrosion considerations would favour such installation. 

## **2.11.3 Hose assembly-Operating conditions** 

A _hose assembly_ shall not be installed where, under normal operating conditions, it is- 

- ( a) exposed to a temperature exceeding the maximum temperature specified in the hose _manufacturer's instructions;_ 

- (b) subject to stress, abrasion, kinking or permanent deformation; or 


## **2.11.4 Hose assembly connecting an appliance** 

A _hose assembly_ for an _appliance_ shall be- 

- ( a) permanently connected to the _appliance_ by a threaded or other metal connection; and 

- (b) permanently connected to the _piping_ by a threaded or other metal connection. 

## **2.12 SHUT-OFF VALVES** 

Shut-off valves, whether manual or automatic, shall be suitable for the application. 

## **2.13 QUICK-CONNECT DEVICES** 

## **2.13.1 General** 

A _quick-connect device_ shall be installed so as to avoid entry of water, dust or other debris. 

## **2.13.2 Restriction on installation** 

A _quick-connect device_ socket shall not be installed inside a _caravan_ or _boat._ 

## **2.14 ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS** 

Electrical supplies to _gas appliances_ shall have a _readily accessible_ and identifiable means of isolation. 







## MEANS OF COMPLIANCE-CYLINDERS 

|||SECTION 3 - CONTENTS<br>MEANS OF COMPLIANCE-CYLINDERS|
|---|---|---|
|||_Page_|








## SECTION 3 

## MEANS OF COMPLIANCE­ CYLINDERS 

## **3.1 GENERAL** 

## **3.1.1 Cylinders** 

See Clause 2.3.1. 

## **3.1.2 Corrosion** 

To prevent corrosion of _cylinders_ under anchor straps, a rubber strip or similar protection shall be positioned between _cylinders_ and anchor straps. 

NOTE: Checks should be made for the legislative requirements relating to the rendering safe, repair, retesting and disposal of faulty, damaged or severely corroded _cylinders._ 

## **3.1.3 Cylinder orientation** 

A _cylinder_ shall be installed upright unless specifically designed for horizontal installation with vapour withdrawal. 

## **3.1.4 Use of in-situ fill cylinders in boats** 

## **3.1.4.1** _General_ 

In-situ fill _cylinders_ shall not be installed in a _boat_ unless it can be demonstrated that, by its design or location, _LP Gas_ vapour cannot enter or accumulate in or on the _boat_ and- 

- ( a) the _cylinder_ does not require bleeding or venting to determine correct fill level; 

- (b) liquid _LP Gas_ is prevented from entering the _appliance_ service line; 

- ( c) the _cylinder_ and fill point are protected from accidental damage by their location or are enclosed in a locker; and 

- ( d) any leakage is directed away from any _ignition sources_ and external to the _boat._ 

## **3.1.4.2** _Internal cylinders_ 

Where a _cylinder_ is located within the body of a _boat,_ either- 

- ( a) the whole of the _cylinder_ together with its attached components and fitting shall been enclosed in a compartment; or 

- (b) the valves, fittings and pipe connections associated with or attached to the _cylinder_ shall be enclosed in a localized sub-compartment, attached to the _cylinder_ and vented to the atmosphere . 

Provision shall be made for ready access to the service valve in all installation arrangements. 

## **3.1.4.3** _Location of fill point_ 

The fill point shall be located so that the following conditions are satisfied: 

- (a) The fill connection cannot be accessed from within the _boat._ 

- (b) The fill connection can be supervised from the open _deck_ of the _boat._ 






## **3.1.4.4** _Safety valve discharge_ 

The discharge provisions for a safety valve shall be such that discharge _gas_ shall not impinge directly on the container or on any adjacent craft, and shall not discharge into the interior of the _boat._ It shall either- 

- ( a) discharge into a locker complying with Clause 3.4; or 

- (b) be piped away. Any fittings, _piping_ attachments or deflectors that are attached to the outlet of the safety valve can interfere with the action of the valve or with _gas_ flow so as to reduce the discharge flow rate. Such attachments shall not be made until the installer has confirmed with the equipment supplier that the flow rate remains adequate for the installation. 

## **3.1.5 Multi-cylinder installations** 

See Clause 2.3.5. 

## **3.2 LOCATION OF LP GAS CYLINDERS** 

## **3.2.1 Restriction on location of cylinders** 

_LP Gas cylinders_ shall not be installed nor shall provision be made for installing or storing any _LP Gas cylinders_ inside any _caravan_ or _boat_ except as permitted in Clause 3.4.5.1. 

## **3.2.2 Required clearances around a cylinder** 

Minimum clearances around a _cylinder_ shall comply with­ 

- ( a) in respect to _ignition sources,_ Figure 3.1; and 

- (b) In respect to openings into a _boat,_ Figure 3 .2. 

## **3.2.3 Mounting and stowage** 

_LP Gas cylinders_ and all high _pressure_ stage _piping_ shall be- 

- ( a) installed in a _cylinder compartment_ or _LP Gas locker_ complying with Clause 3.4; 

- (b) mounted externally on the chassis of a _caravan_ in a protected position; 

- ( c) mounted externally on the chassis of a _caravan_ under the skirt; or 

- ( d) mounted externally on the _upper deck_ or cabin top of a _boat_ but not within one metre of an opening into the _boat,_ or in such a way as to impede movement on board the _boat_ and at least- 

      - (i) 1000 mm from any opening into the _boat_ below the _cylinder_ valve; 

      - (ii) 150 mm from any opening into the _boat_ above the _cylinder_ valve; and 

   - (iii) 1500 mm from any fixed source of ignition. 

   - NOTE: See Figure 3 .2. 

## **3.2.4 Stowage of spare cylinders** 

Stowage requirements for unconnected or spare _cylinders_ shall be the same as for connected _cylinders._ 

## **3.2.5 Heat shield** 

Where the _cylinder_ is mounted less than 200 mm from any heat source (for example exhaust or engine compartment), _cylinders_ shall be adequately shielded from the source of heat. The heat shield shall be at least 25 mm from the shielded surface and from the heat source. 








* This distance is<br>measured from the<br>top of any cylinder<br>valve<br>




Exchange cylinder, mm  In-situ fill cylinder, mm<br>A  500  1500<br>B  1500  3500<br>


NOTE: See Clauses 2.3.4 and 3.1.4 if installation of in-situ fill _cylinders_ is being considered. 

## FIGURE 3.1 MINIMUM CLEARANCE TO IGNITION SOURCES 



* To opening below<br>- ----;------- =--c: [c---] Com pa rt m en t<br>drain above<br>water line<br>Sealed compartment<br>door or lid<br>


DIMENSIONS IN MILLIMETRES 

FIGURE 3.2 TYPICAL CYLINDER MOUNTING LOCATION FOR BOATS 





> >, .0 u (J) rn rn (J) u 

## **3.3 CYLINDER ATTACHMENT** 

## **3.3.1 Restraints** 

_Cylinders_ shall be restrained by attachments designed, constructed and secured in place so they shall withstand a load equal to 4 times the weight of the full _cylinder_ and fittings in all directions. The method of attachment shall not cause undue stresses to the _cylinder._ 

NOTE: A typical installation is shown in Figure 3.3. Other methods of installation are acceptable provided they comply with the intent of this Clause. 

## **3.3.2 Structures** 

The structure to which the _cylinder_ is attached shall be capable of withstanding the forces specified and reinforcement shall be added where necessary to ensure compliance with Clause 3.3.1. 

(J) "E "§_ C (J) .c :!: u (J) C ct! :::, Cl C 



Add insulating<br>strip between<br>Baseplate bolted<br>cylinders and<br>to drawbar with<br>clamping bands<br>min. 4/ M10 U-bolts<br>or equivalent<br>Clamping band to<br>tighten securely<br>around cylinder<br>Clamping band<br>supports, min.<br>two per cylinder,  to baseplate to prevent<br>welded to baseplate  cylinders moving<br>= L ocat in g ring we Id ed<br>===  :  <br>""'""'""'""'""'<br>


## FIGURE 3.3 TYPICAL DOUBLE CYLINDER MOUNTING ARRANGEMENT FOR A CARAVAN 

## **3.4 CYLINDER COMPARTMENTS AND LP GAS LOCKERS** 

## **3.4.1 Caravans** 

A _cylinder compartment_ or _LP Gas locker_ shall comply with the following as appropriate: 

- (a) Be designed to- 

   - (i) house _cylinder(s)_ and their associated equipment only; 

   - (ii) allow the _cylinder(s)_ to be positioned in the compartment without obstructing the drain in Item (f) below; 

   - (iii) not have access from the inside of a _caravan_ to a _cylinder_ installed in a compartment except as provided under Clause 3.4.5.1; and 

   - (iv) permit easy removal of the _cylinder(s)_ and the operation of the _cylinder_ valve(s) where required for exchange purposes. 

NOTE: Consideration should be given to the location of the associated equipment when determining the compartment size. 

- (b) Be constructed of material that is water and corrosion resistant. 





- (c) Be capable of securing the filled _cylinder(s)._ 

NOTE: For requirements of securing method see Clause 3 .3 .1. 

- ( d) Be sealed to prevent _gas_ vapour from entering the _caravan._ 

- (e) The access door or opening shall be openable without the use of tools. NOTE: A key is not regarded as a tool. 

- (f) Have a drain in, or within, 25 mm of the base, as per option 1 or 2 of Figure 3.4, with a minimum clear area of 500 mm[2] • The drain outlet- 

   - (i) shall not face the direction of travel and shall face away from any opening into the _caravan_ which is less than 1 m away unless that opening is more than 150 mm above drain outlet; and 

   - (ii) shall be at least 1.5 m from any source of ignition unless the _ignition source_ is at least 500 mm above the drain outlet. 

Alternatively, provide vents in the compartment/locker door at both high and low levels. Each opening shall provide a minimum of 5 000 mm[2 ] of free area for every _cylinder_ enclosed and shall meet the clearances specified in Items (i) and (ii) above. The bottom edge of the lower vent shall be within 25 mm of the base. 

- (g) Not contain any electrical equipment other than a non-sparking shut-off device. NOTE: See Figure 3.4. 




Upper<br>vent<br>




Lower<br>vent<br>



Option 1 or ption 2, min. 500 mm2 drain 

   - FIGURE 3.4 TYPICAL LP GAS LOCKERS AND CYLINDER COMPARTMENTS SHOWING VENT AND DRAIN ALTERNATIVES 

- (h) Have a sign clearly indicating that only _cylinders_ and their associated equipment are permitted in the cylinder compartment. The following wording shall be used: 


NOTES: 

- 1 The font size in warning sign should be a minimum of 10 mm in height . 

- 2 See Figure 3 .5 for an example of the warning sign and its location in the compartment. 





## **3.4.2 Cylinders located in a combined storage compartment/locker** 

Where _cylinder(s)_ are located in a combined external compartment also used for general storage, the _cylinder compartment_ shall be separated from the general storage area by a vertical divider sealed to the sides and floor of the compartment and extending to the compartment lid. 

The _cylinder compartment_ space shall contain the _cylinder(s)_ and associated _gas_ equipment only and be vented at the base as described in Clause 3.4.l(f) and shown in Figure 3.5. 

NOTE: Refer to Appendix H for the recommended location for the regulator to mitigate possible fouling of diaphragm by condensate. 




Gas cylinder<br>General storage/-------+'\.<br>gas cylinder<br>compartment lid<br>General storage<br>compartment<br>Genera I storage/ - "' ----.r<br>gas cylinder<br>compartment divider<br>Gas cylinder<br>compartment label<br>(see Figure 3.6 or<br>Figure 3. 7)<br>Drain(s)<br>compartment -----+t -----<br>


NOTE: The font size in warning sign should be a minimum of 10 mm in height. 

FIGURE 3.5 COMBINED CYLINDER COMPARTMENT/LP GAS LOCKER 







## **3.4.3 Boats** 

A _cylinder compartment_ shall comply with the following: 

- (a) Not be _accessible_ from an enclosed section of the _boat._ 

- (b) Be designed to- 

   - (i) house _cylinders_ and their associated equipment only; and 

   - (ii) allow the _cylinder_ to be positioned in the compartment without obstructing the drain in Item (h); and 

   - (iii) permit easy removal of the _cylinder(s)_ and the operation of the _cylinder_ valve(s). 

   - NOTE: Consideration should be given to the location of the associated equipment when determining the compartment size. 

- ( c) Be constructed of material that is water and corrosion resistant. 

- ( d) Be capable of securing the _cylinder(s)_ when full. 

   - NOTE: For requirements of securing method, see Clause 3.3.1. 

- (e) Be sealed to prevent _gas_ vapour from entering any enclosed section of the _boat._ 


- (f) The access door or opening shall be openable without the use of tools. 

- (g) Where the access opening into the compartment is other than at the top, a lower vertical return or lip of at least 100 mm shall be provided along the full length of the opening. 

- (h) Have a drain in the base of not less than 19 mm diameter, which is led outboard, without pockets that could retain water, to a point lower than the locker bottom. The outlet shall be positioned such that it cannot be submerged. 

- (i) Not contain any electrical equipment other than a non-sparking shut-off device. 

- U[) ] Have a sign clearly indicating that only _cylinders_ and their associated equipment are permitted in the cylinder compartment. The following wording shall be used: 


NOTES: 

- 1 The font size in warning sign should be a minimum of 10 mm in height . 

- 2 See Figure 3 .5 for an example of the warning sign and its location in the compartment. 

## **3.4.4 Ventilation openings** 

_Cylinder compartments_ and _LP Gas lockers_ that are ventilated top and bottom shall have a combined free vent area of not less than 1000 mm[2 ] /kg of stored _LP Gas._ 

## **3.4.5 Access to cylinder compartments** 

## **3.4.5.1** _Cylinder compartments with internal access_ 

- NOTE: For _caravans_ and _boats_ where both external mounting of _cylinders_ and penetration of the bodywork are structurally unacceptable, internal access to the _cylinder compartment_ may be provided for removal and replacement of _cylinders._ 


The compartment shall be able to contain no more than two 15 kg _cylinders._ The bottom edge of the door opening shall be no less than 100 mm above the compartment floor for _boats caravans._ and 50 mm above the compartment floor for 





In New Zealand, where the compartment is _accessible_ from within the _caravan_ or _boat,_ access to the compartment shall be provided only through a door that latches closed _caravan_ or securely. The compartment shall be sealed to prevent flow of vapour into the _boat_ when the door is closed. 

## **3.4.5.2** _Obstructions_ 

_Cylinders,_ equipment, pipework and cabling shall not obstruct any vents or drains from the compartment or _LP Gas locker._ 

## **3.4.6 Identification of cylinder compartment or LP Gas locker** 

A durable label complying with Figure 3.6 (Australia) or Figure 3.7 (New Zealand) shall be applied to the outside of the _cylinder compartment_ or _LP Gas locker_ to indicate the presence of an _LP Gas cylinder(s)._ 


Background colour, retroflective red to AS 1906.1 

Lettering and symbol to be white 

DIMENSIONS IN MILLIMETRES 

FIGURE 3.6 AUSTRALIAN LABEL FOR CYLINDER COMPARTMENT OR LP GAS LOCKER 




LPG<br>


FIGURE 3.7 NEW ZEALAND LABEL FOR CYLINDER COMPARTMENT OR LP GAS LOCKER 






## MEANS OF COMPLIANCE-GAS PRESSURE REGULATORS 

||SECTION 4 - CONTENTS<br>MEANS OF COMPLIANCE-GAS PRESSURE REGULATORS|
|---|---|
||_Page_|







SECTION 4 MEANS OF COMPLIANCE-GAS PRESSURE REGULATORS 

## **4.1 SUITABILITY OF PRESSURE REGULATORS** 

In Australia, _cylinder_ regulators shall be _certified_ to AS 4621 or UL 144 and provide over­ _pressure_ protection to ensure the _pressure_ downstream of the regulator will not exceed 14 kPa. 

NOTE: In New Zealand, _cylinder_ regulators and automatic changeover valves are required by the Hazardous Substances (Compressed _Gases)_ Regulations 2004 to be of a registered type. 

## **4.2 OUTLET PRESSURE** 

The outlet _pressure_ shall be set to 3.0 kPa nominally to ensure correct simultaneous operation of all _gas appliances._ 

## **4.3 MOUNTING AND SUPPORT OF REGULATOR** 

_Gas pressure regulators_ shall- 

- ( a) be mounted in a well-ventilated location; 

- (b) be mounted- 

   - (i) directly to the structure of the _caravan_ or _boat;_ or 

   - (ii) in New Zealand, directly on the _cylinder_ valve, provided this does not unduly stress the _cylinder_ valve. 

- (c) be located so as not to obstruct the removal or replacement of _cylinders;_ 

- ( d) be located to permit drainage of any liquid back into the _cylinder;_ and NOTE: See Figure Hl in Appendix H for an example. 

- ( e) if located externally, have the vent positioned to avoid blockage by contaminants. 






## MEANS OF COMPLIANCE-PIPING AND FITTINGS 

|||SECTION 5- CONTENTS<br>MEANS OF COMPLIANCE-PIPING AND FITTINGS|
|---|---|---|
|||Page|







SECTION 5 MEANS OF COMPLIANCE­ PIPING AND FITTINGS 

(J) "E "§_ C (J) .c :!: u (J) C ct! :::, Cl C 



z <( 

## **5.1 GENERAL** 

## **5.1.1 Location** 

_Piping_ shall not be located where it could be subjected to damage. 

## **5.1.2 Size** 

_Piping_ shall be of sufficient size that the operation of _appliances_ shall not be affected by the _pressure_ drop in any pipe. With all _appliances_ operating, the maximum _pressure_ drop across the _piping_ shall not exceed 0.25 kPa. 

## **5.1.3 Construction** 

Materials, valves and fittings used for the construction, extension, alteration or repair of any _LP Gas piping_ system shall be suitable for their intended purpose and free from defects. Any existing unsafe materials shall be replaced. 

## **5.1.4 Piping specification** 

## **5.1.4.1** _High pressure piping_ 

_Piping_ between _cylinders_ and regulators (high _pressure piping)_ shall be any one of the following: 

- (a) Copper _(pigtail),_ with a nominal wall thickness of 1.22 mm, complying with, or equivalent to, AS 1572 and with an alloy designation C12200 to AS 2738. 

- (b) A _hose assembly_ complying with AS/NZS 1869 Class C, D or F, or other Standard specifying hose assemblies for use with _LP Gas_ with a minimum working _pressure_ of 2.6 MPa in the temperature range -20[°] C to +65[°] C. 

- (c) Stainless steel to ASTM A269 Grade 316 or 304. 

## **5.1.4.2** _Low pressure_ 

_Piping_ between the outlet of the _pressure_ regulator and the inlet of a _gas appliance_ (low _pressure piping)_ shall be any one or a combination of the following: 

- (a) Copper _piping_ in the fully annealed condition complying with NZS 3501 or AS 1432 _Type A_ or _Type B._ Copper _piping_ in _boats_ shall have a plastic coating applied by the manufacturer. Fittings shall be of the flared (to AS 3688 or AS D26) or capillary (to AS 3688 ) type, except that fittings with metallic olives may be used for connection to 

- an _appliance_ only in accordance with the relevant _manufacturer's instructions._ 

- (b) A _hose assembly_ with a minimum working pressure of at least 14 kPa and working temperature range of at least 65[°] C. Hoses _certified_ to AS/NZS 1869 Class A, B, C or D, or complying with BS 3212 Type 2, ANSI UL 21 or other similar Standard shall be acceptable provided they satisfy this performance requirement. 

Hose assemblies shall be provided with integral threaded metallic ends or secured to a nozzle by crimping or by the use of a suitable metallic clamp. Worm drive hose clips shall not be used. 

- (c) Stainless steel to ASTM A269 Grade 316 with flared compression fittings to AS 3688. 

NOTES: 

- 1 The possibility of galvanic corrosion should be investigated before different _piping_ materials are combined in an installation. 

- 2 For pipe sizing refer to Appendix D. 

>, .0 u (J) rn rn (J) u 




(J) "E "§_ C (J) ..c :!: u (J) C ct! :::, Cl C C  :5 u "E (J) u :::, 0 "<t C\I .0 (J) LL (.0 C\I C >­0 (? 0 ...J 0 **z** I 0 UJ I­ LL 0  ci5 a: UJ > z 

z <( 

## **5.1.4.3** _Suitable piping_ 

Table 5 .1 lists suitable _piping._ 


## **MATERIALS FOR PIPING SYSTEMS IN CARAVANS AND BOA TS** 

||Materials|Materials|
|---|---|---|
|**Section of****_piping_system**|||
||Pipe|Fitting|
||Copper tube toAS 1572having an<br>alloy designation Cl2200 to|Copper alloy fared compression<br>ftting toAS 3688orAS D26|
||AS 2738with a minimum wall||
||thickness of 1.22 mm and size of<br>DN 6|Copper or copper alloy capillary<br>ftting toAS 3688|
||_Hse assembly_toAS/NZS 1869<br>Class C, D or F with an excess fow<br>valve immediately upstream of the|_POL ftting_and tail piece|
|Between_cylinder_and regulator|_hose assembly_<br>(see Note)||
||Stainless steel complying with||
||ASTM A269grade 316 or 304||
||assembly. Not to be used on_boats_or||
||where high levels of chloride (salt)<br>can be expected. Assemblies using|_POL_to quarter male NPT<br>inverted fare|
||316 stainless with a pitting||
||resistance equivalent of 22 or greater||
||may be used.||
||_Hose assembly_toAS/NZS 1869|End couplings threaded to|
||Class A, B, C or D|AS ISO 7.1|
||Stainless steel toASTM A269<br>Grade 316|Fittings to be compatible with<br>pipe material and the<br>_manufacturer's specications._|
|From outlet of_cylinder_<br>regulator to_aliances_|Fully annealed copper tube to<br>NZS 3501orAS 1432_Type A_or<br>_Te B._<br>When used on_boats,_to include|Copper alloy fared compression<br>ftting toAS 3688<br>Copper or copper alloy capillary<br>ftting toAS 3688|
||plastic covering applied by the<br>manufcturer|Socket frmed using an<br>appropriate tube expanding tool|



NOTE: The excess flow valve may be an integral part of the _POL fitting._ 

## **5.1.4.4** _Prohibited types of piping, joints and fittings_ 

In Australia, multilayer (composite) _piping_ systems shall not be used. 

In New Zealand, multilayer (composite) _piping_ system may be used if the product _boats_ and _caravans. certification_ provides for their use in 

As specified in Clause 2.10.1, the following fittings and jointing systems shall not be used in _piping:_ 

- (a) Croxed joints. 

- (b) Compression fittings with non-metallic olives. 

- ( c) Compression fittings with metallic olives if not approved for use with _gas_ m the _manufacturer's instructions._ 


>, .0 u (J) rn rn (J) u 






- (f) Plain nipples, e.g., running nipple with parallel threads, except where no practical alternative is available. 

   - NOTE: A brass external parallel thread to a brass internal parallel thread may be used, provided that the joint is welded or a suitable permanent quick-setting thread compound is used and a means of disconnection is provided immediately downstream. _Wherever possible_ the fitting should be secured against disturbance. 

## **5.1.5 Cylinder connections** 

The high _pressure piping_ between the _cylinder_ and the regulator shall allow for vibration, either by including a suitable hose assembly at least 500 mm but not more than 600 mm long, or alternatively by providing loops or U-bends in the connecting _piping._ 

Hose assemblies between the cylinder and the regulator shall have- 

- ( a) a maximum length of 600 mm; and 

- (b) a nominal size of 6 mm. 

Where the manifold or _pressure_ regulator is mounted on a member integral to the _caravan_ or _boat,_ adequate flexibility shall be provided between the _cylinder(s)_ and manifold/regulator assembly. 

## **5.2 INSTALLATION OF PIPING** 

## **5.2.1 General requirements** 

Installed _piping_ shall be- 


- (b) protected by a rubber grommet or equivalent protection at all points at which it passes through partitions or bulkheads, unless a bulkhead fitting is used; 

- ( c) designed, constructed and installed so that it has sufficient flexibility to avoid excessive stresses due to possible relative movement of the _piping_ and the supporting structure; 

- ( d) at least 25 mm from any electrical service; and 

- ( e) protected against abrasion, kinking or permanent deformation. 

## **5.2.2 Piping in caravans** 

The _main run_ of the _piping_ system shall be located outside the _caravan_ regardless of the number of _appliances_ connected to the pipework. 

In addition to Clause _5.2.1,piping_ in _caravans_ shall be- 

- (a) firmly fastened in a protected location so that all unions and joints are _accessible,_ and shut-off valves and hoses are _readily accessible._ Any void between the living space and a false bottom containing consumer _piping_ shall be sealed from the living space and shall be provided with a minimum 500 mm **[2 ]** ventilation area adjacent to any unions and joints to allow leaking _gas_ to escape to atmosphere; 

- (b) arranged such that the branch pipe separately enters the interior of the _caravan_ adjacent to each _appliance;_ and 

- ( c) where the _piping_ lies along the chassis, fastened to the side of a structural member and not beneath it. 





(J) "E "§_ C (J) .c :!: u (J) C ct! :::, Cl C C  :5 u "E (J) u :::, 0 "<t C\I .0 (J) LL (.0 C\I C >­0 (? 0 ...J 0 **z** I 0 UJ I­ LL 0  ci5 a: UJ > z 

z <( 

>, .0 u (J) rn rn (J) u 

## **5.2.3 Piping in boats** 

In addition to Clause _5.2.I,piping_ in _boats_ shall be- 

- ([a] ) firmly fastened in a protected location outside any structure or false bottom. All unions and joints shall be _accessible,_ and shut-off valves and hoses shall be _readily accessible._ 

- (b) constructed from continuous lengths from regulator to branch points and from those points to the _appliance_ unless it can be demonstrated that this is impracticable; and 

- ( c) continuous where passing through an engine room or sleeping accommodation space. 

Penetrations of _decks_ or bulkheads shall be vapour-proof. 

## **5.2.4 Rigid piping** 

In all cases, installed rigid _piping_ shall be- 

- ( a) protected from direct contact with metallic parts of the structure; and 

- (b) at least 100 mm from exposed live parts of electrical fittings. 

## **5.2.5 Hose assemblies** 

Hose assemblies shall be- 

- ( a) of a continuous length and as short as practicable for its application; 

- (b) used only between the regulator and rigid _piping_ and between rigid _piping_ and _appliances,_ or where there is only one _appliance,_ directly between the regulator and the _appliance;_ and 

- ( c) installed so that the possibility of damage by rodent attack is minimized and they are- 

   - (i) not subjected to temperatures above 65[°] C; 

   - (ii) at least 100 mm from components of the engine exhaust system; and 

   - (iii) protected from exposure to ultraviolet light. 

## **5.2.6 Prohibition on earthing of piping** 

_Piping_ shall not be used as an earth electrode or earth continuity conductor. 


## **5.2.7.1** _Manual isolation valves_ 

Manual isolation valves shall be in a _readily accessible_ position. These valves shall be of a suitable quarter turn type and constructed so as to indicate clearly whether the valve is in the open or closed position. If the purpose of the valve is not obvious from its location, the valve shall be appropriately labelled. 

_Manual shut-off valves_ shall comply with Type 1 requirements of AS 4617 or equivalent and be _certified._ 

## **5.2. 7.2** _Automatic shut-off valves_ 

Automatic shut-off valves shall comply with Class 1 requirements of AS 4629 or equivalent and be _certified._ 

## **5.2.7.3** _Gas appliance connection and isolation_ 

In Australia only, a shut-off valve shall be provided prior to the inlet connection of each _appliance._ 

## **5.2.8 Quick-connect devices** 

Quick-connect devices shall not be installed inside a _caravan_ or _boat._ 





## **5.2.9 Jointing compounds and materials** 

Jointing compounds shall not be used to compensate for ill-fitting joints and shall not be applied to compression joints, union joints, or _POL fittings._ 

Jointing compounds and materials shall- 

- ( a) comply with AS 4623 or equivalent and, in Australia, be _certified;_ 

- (b) be suitable for the application; and 

- ( c) be used only with chemically compatible materials and where the surfaces have been prepared and cleaned strictly in accordance with the relevant _manufacturer's instructions_ for the jointing compound or material. 

## **5.2.10 Pipe supports and fixings** 

## **5.2.10.1** _Construction_ 

All _piping_ shall be supported by prefabricated clips of either the same material as, or of a material compatible with, the pipe and fastened with nuts and bolts, rivets or screws. 

## **5.2.10.2** _Support spacings_ 

Supports shall be provided within 150 mm of every bend, elbow, tee or branch fitting, excluding loops, and elsewhere at spacings not greater than specified in Table 5.2. 

## **TABLE 5.2** 

## **PIPING SUPPORT INTERVALS** 

|Pipe|material|type|**Vertical**<br>**mm**|**runs**<br>|**Horizontal runs**<br>**mm**|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||Rigid||1250||600|
||Flexible||750||300|



## **5.2.11 Sealing of open ends** 

## **5.2.11.1** _Removal of debris_ 

Before any section is permanently connected or sealed it shall be checked for debris and moisture and cleared and dried before sealing. 

## **5.2.11.2** _Open ends to be sealed while work in progress_ 

Where alteration, repair or extension to _piping_ necessitates the removal of fittings or a _gas appliance_ or cutting of an installed pipe, all open ends, other than those at the immediate work area, shall be sealed prior to and for the duration of the work. When the work site is vacated all open ends shall be sealed. 

NOTE: The closing of a shut-off valve will not satisfy this requirement unless the outlet of the valve is sealed. 

## **5.2.11.3** _Outlet provided for future connection to be sealed_ 

Where an outlet has been provided for the connection of a _gas appliance_ but is not to be used immediately, and the outlet is not fitted with a _quick-connect device,_ it shall be sealed using a plug, cap, blank flange or a capped or plugged _manual shut-off valve._ 






## MEANS OF COMPLIANCE-GAS APPLIANCES 

||SECTION 6 - CONTENTS<br>MEANS OF COMPLIANCE-GAS APPLIANCES|
|---|---|
||_Page_|
|6.7|RESTRICTION ON INSTALLATION OF AN APPLIANCE ON A PETROL-FUELLED|








SECTION 6 MEANS OF COMPLIANCE-GAS APPLIANCES 

## **6.1 PROHIBITED APPLIANCES** 

Refer to Clause 2. 9 .1 for details of prohibitions and exemptions. 

## **6.2 RESTRICTION FOR STOWED APPLIANCES** 

_Appliances_ installed such that they can be stowed away whilst still connected to the _gas_ supply shall be provided with means to ensure that _gas_ cannot flow when the _appliance_ is in the stowed position. 

NOTE: A cooking _appliance_ installed beneath an aftermarket lid or cover is considered a stowed _appliance._ 

## **6.3 FLAME SAFEGUARD SYSTEM** 

All _appliances_ shall be fitted _with.flame safeguard systems_ to all _burners._ 

## **6.4 MANUFACTURER'S INSTRUCTIONS** 

_Gas appliances_ shall be installed in accordance with the _manufacturer's instructions_ using good installation practices . 

NOTE: In Australia, where there is conflict between the _manufacturer's instructions_ and the requirements of this Standard, the matter should be referred to the _Technical Regulator_ for a ruling. 

In New Zealand, where there is any conflict between the relevant _manufacturer's instructions_ for installation and the requirements of this Standard, the matter should in the first instance be referred to the _gas appliance_ manufacturer or the New Zealand representative for a ruling. This Section 2. does not relieve any responsibility for compliance with performance requirements of 

## **6.5 CLEARANCES** 

_combustible materials Gas appliances_ shall be installed with clearances from as specified in the _manufacturer's instructions._ In any case the temperature rise of surrounding _combustible materials_ shall not exceed 65[°] C above ambient temperature . 

## **6.6 DISTANCE FROM SOURCES OF FUEL** 

_caravans_ and _boats_ Except for fuelled by diesel, _gas appliances_ fitted with a continuous source of ignition shall not be fitted, or vented, within 1000 mm (vapour path), of the fuel filler cap or fuel tank vent. 

## **6.7 RESTRICTION ON INSTALLATION OF AN APPLIANCE ON A PETROL­ FUELLED BOAT** 

Where an _appliance_ with a continuously burning flame is to be installed below the _upper deck_ of a petrol-fuelled _boat_ and where there is a possibility of petrol vapour entering the space where the _appliance_ is to be mounted, the _appliance_ shall be installed so the air _deck_ on which the intake to the continuously burning flame is at least 600 mm above the _appliance_ is to be mounted. 






z <( 


## **6.8 ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS** 

## **6.8.1 General** 

A _gas appliance_ connected to the electricity supply shall be provided with a means of electrical isolation that is adjacent to the _appliance_ location and is _accessible_ with the _appliance_ in the installed position. 

Where the _appliance_ is installed in a location that is exposed to the weather, the electrical isolation shall be either a weatherproof type, or located in a position that is not exposed to the weather. 

## **6.8.2 For Australian use only** 

In Australia, the means of isolation shall be­ 

- ( a) a plug to a switched socket outlet; 

- (b) a plug to a socket-outlet that may be located in an inaccessible position but has a separate switch operating in all live (active and neutral) conductors located in an _accessible_ position; or 

- (c) where hard-wired, a switch operating in all live (active and neutral) conductors. 

## **6.9 SPACE HEATERS** 

Permanently fitted space heaters shall be of a room-sealed type. 

## **6.10 COOKING APPLIANCES** 

## **6.10.1 Clearances around gas cooking appliances** 

Clearances around _gas_ cooking _appliances_ shall be in accordance with the cooking _appliance manufacturer's specifications._ In the event that clearances are not specified, clearances shall be as in Figure 6.1 and as follows: 

- (a) _Requirement I-Overhead clearances-(Measurement A)_ 

   - Range hoods and exhaust fans shall be installed in accordance with the relevant _manufacturer's instructions._ 

Clearance _A,_ between the highest part of the highest _burner_ of the _gas_ cooking _appliance_ and a range hood or exhaust fan ( overhead clearance), shall be no less than 600 mm for a range hood, and no less than 750 mm for an exhaust fan. Any other downward facing _combustible surface_ less than 600 mm above the highest part of the highest _burner_ shall be protected for the full width and depth of the cooking surface area in accordance with Clause 6.10.2. However, this clearance to any surface shall not be less than 450 mm. 

Where the required clearance to a _range hood_ cannot be met, a _range hood_ constructed of _non-combustible materials_ may be installed at not less than 450 mm, provided that- 

- (i) the _range hood_ is suitable at the installed clearance; and 

- (ii) the _gas appliance_ is _certified_ as a _caravan/marine_ cooker at the installed clearance. 

NOTE: This requirement does not apply to the installation of commercial catering equipment. 

- (b) _Requirement 2-Measurements B (side clearances) and_ C _(height)_ 


Where _B,_ measured from the periphery of the nearest _burner_ to any vertical _combustible surface_ is less than 200 mm, that surface shall be protected in accordance with Clause 6.10.2 to a height (C) of not less than 150 mm above the periphery of the nearest _burner_ for the full dimension (width or depth) of the cooking surface area. 



(J) "E "§_ C (J) .c :!: u (J) C ct! :::, Cl C C  :5 u "E (J) u :::, 0 "<t 


z <( 

47 Where the _gas_ cooking _appliance_ is fitted with a 'splashback', protection of the rear wall is not required provided the splashback achieves protection of any _combustible surface_ less than 200 mm from the periphery of the nearest _burner_ to a height not less than 150 mm above the periphery of the nearest _burner._ 

NOTE: Consideration is to be given to window treatments and painted surfaces on glass splashbacks when located near cooking _appliances._ 

- (c) _Requirement 3-Additional requirements for freestanding and elevated gas cooking appliances-(Measurements D and E)_ Where _D,_ the distance from the periphery of the nearest _burner_ to a horizontal _combustible surface_ is less than 200 mm, then _E_ shall be 13 mm or more, or the horizontal _combustible trivet._ See Details I and II in surface shall be above the 

- Figure 6.1. 





NOTES: 

- 1 Details I and II relate to Requirement 3 of Clause 6.10.1 ( c ). 

- 2 In this case, any vertical combustible surface needs to be protected in accordance with Requirement 2 of Clause 6.10.l(b). 

## **FIGURE 6.1 REQUIRED CLEARANCES AROUND GAS COOKING APPLIANCES** 

## **6.10.2 Protection of a combustible surface near a gas cooking appliance** 

In order to meet the requirements of Clause 2.9.3, any _combustible surface_ within the clearance zone specified in Clause 6.10.1 shall be protected in accordance with Appendix C for the applicable facing and backing materials. **6.10.3 Vapour seal** When a _gas hob_ is installed above a refrigerator, the shelf shall be vapour sealed so that if any _gas_ should leak from the cooker it cannot be ignited by the refrigerator. 

>, .0 u (J) rn rn (J) u 





z <( 

>, .0 u (J) rn rn (J) u 

## **6.10.4 Warning label** 

A permanent legible warning label with a mm1mum character height of 4 mm shall be affixed in a conspicuous position on, or adjacent to, the _appliance_ and shall provide at least the following information: 

## **WARNING** 

Ensure ventilation when the cooker is in use. Do not use for space heating. 

## **6.10.5 Cooking appliances on boats** 

Where _gas_ cooking _appliances_ are mounted on gimbals to provide a stable cooking surface the following requirements shall apply: 

- (a) The _appliance_ shall be connected by a flexible connection. 

- (b) Limit stops that permit adequate movement during normal operating conditions shall be fitted to minimize stresses on the flexible connection. 

(J) "E "§_ C (J) .c :!: u (J) C ct! :::, Cl C 

- ( c) The required clearances to _combustible surfaces_ shall be maintained at all possible positions of the _appliance_ or a suitable deflector shall be fitted. 

- ( d) Means shall be provided to positively retain the _appliance_ within the gimbals at all angles of tilt. 

- ( e) Means shall be provided to prevent movement when the _appliance_ is not in use. 

NOTE: Where a cooking _appliance_ is to be installed consideration should be given to the fitting of fiddle rails and potholders to the _appliance_ to prevent unintentional movement of cooking vessels. 

## **6.11 REFRIGERATORS** 

## **6.11.1 Flues** 

to the outside. Refrigerators shall be _jlued_ 

NOTE: _Flues_ may be inclusive of the venting system as supplied by the manufacturer. 

## **6.11.2 Vents** 

A wall vent measuring a minimum free area of 500 mm **[2 ]** shall be provided at the bottom level of the refrigerator compartment so that any accumulation of leaked _gas_ can escape to outside. 

NOTE: Ventilation as required in Clause 6.11.4 may satisfy this requirement. 

## **6.11.3 Clearances** 

A refrigerator installed in a _caravan_ or _boat_ shall be installed in a sealed recess to prevent the infiltration of _combustion products_ into the living space. 

## **6.11.4 Ventilation** 

In addition to the requirements listed in Section 7, ventilation at the rear of the unit and to the exterior of the _caravan_ shall be provided to ensure the proper functioning of the refrigeration unit. 

In the absence of specific _manufacturer's instructions-_ 

- (a) the ventilation shall comprise openings located at the top and bottom levels of the enclosed space; 

- (b) each opening shall be of a free area not less than specified in Table 6.1; and 





- ( c) the upper ventilation opening shall be located entirely above the condenser/absorption fins. 

   - NOTE: Typical installation diagrams are shown in Figure 6.2. 

## **TABLE 6.1** 

## **ADDITIONAL VENTILATION FOR REFRIGERATORS** 



Refrigerator storage capacity, L  Free area for ventilation, mm [2 ]<br>Up to and including 100  32 500<br>101 to 200  45 000<br>Greater than 200  65 000<br>




Top<br>wall  vent<br>Condenser<br>Flue<br>Minimum<br>Minimum<br>ventilation<br>ventilation<br>height<br>height<br>terminal<br>Bottom<br>wall  vent<br>wall vent<br>


FIGURE 6.2 TYPICAL INSTALLATIONS OF A GAS REFRIGERATOR 

## **6.12 INSTANTANEOUS WATER HEATERS** 

See Clause 2.9.1 for prohibition on installation related to instantaneous water heaters. 

## **6.13 SPA POOL HEATERS ON BOATS** 

## **6.13.1 Prohibited locations** 

A spa heater shall not be installed in the following locations: 

- (a) Upstream of a filter or pump. 

- (b) Downstream of an automatic chlorinator. 

- ( c) In a storage area for pool chemicals or flammable materials. 

   - NOTE: Pool chemicals may contain chlorine which, when drawn into the heater _burner,_ will quickly cause corrosion and damage to the heater. 

## **6.13.2 Supporting base** 

A pool heater shall, unless otherwise stated in the _manufacturer's instructions_ for installation, be installed on a stable non-combustible base. 





## **6.13.3 Control systems** 

Pool heaters for spa and therapeutic applications shall have the following controls: 

- (a) A system that ensures the water temperature in the pool does not exceed 40[°] C. 

- (b) A manual reset high temperature limit device independent of the control system required by Item (a) to prevent the water temperature in the pool exceeding 45[°] C. 

- ( c) Controls that ensure water is flowing through the heater before the main _gas_ valve allows _gas_ to the _burners._ 

## **6.13.4 Requirement for pool heater where flow and return water pipes are of plastic** 

Where the water flow and return pipes are of plastic, these pipes shall be connected to the heater with a minimum of 1 m of un-lagged metallic pipe unless stated otherwise in the relevant _pool heater manufacturer's instructions._ 

NOTE: This requirement prevents the plastic pipe being affected by residual heat when the pool heater is shut down. 

## **6.13.5 Non-return valve required** 

A _non-return valve_ shall be fitted in the water return line between the filter and the _pool heater_ unless stated otherwise in the relevant _pool heater manufacturer's instructions._ 

## **6.13.6 Restriction on fitting of a valve in water flow line** 

A valve shall not be fitted in the water flow line between the heater and the pool, unless there is an arrangement to vent the system when the valve is closed. Where a _pressure_ relief valve provides such venting, that valve shall comply with AS 13 57 .1 and be fitted with an appropriately terminated drain. 






## MEANS OF COMPLIANCE-VENTILATION 

||SECTION 7 - CONTENTS<br>MEANS OF COMPLIANCE-VENTILATION|
|---|---|
||_Page_|







SECTION 7 MEANS OF COMPLIANCE­ VENTILATION 

## **7.1 GENERAL** 

All compartments shall have adequate ventilation to prevent excessive condensation, build­ up of products of combustion, or other toxic conditions. 

## **7.2 APPROPRIATE VENTILATION SYSTEMS** 

In order to ensure adequate flow of air for ventilation, high level and low level ventilation shall be provided. Such ventilation may be assisted by wind-actuated self-trimming cowls, rotary exhauster heads, or an interlocked, fan-assisted ventilation system. 

## **7.3 VENTILATION OPENINGS-CARAVANS AND BOATS** 

## **7.3.1 Minimum free area** 

is The free area of the total permanent ventilation for any space in which a _gas appliance_ installed shall be at least 4000 mm **[2 ]** or the value obtained from the formula below, whichever is the greater: 


where 

- _V_ = minimum free area, in mm **[2 ]** 

- _U_ = input rating for all _gas appliances,_ (other than room sealed) m the space, including cookers, in MJ/h, refer to rating plate 

- _P_ = number of sleeping spaces in the _caravan_ or _boat_ 

## **Example calculation** 

For a _caravan_ designed to sleep 3 people, and having a _gas_ cooker rated at 29 MJ/h (8 kW), the minimum free area for ventilation, _V,_ is (610 x 29) + (650 x 3) = 19 640 mm **[2] •** NOTES: 

- 1 This formula applies to any space inside the _caravan_ or _boat_ where _gas appliances_ are installed. If the space is a normally divided part of the _caravan_ or _boat,_ or can be divided temporarily by means of doors, curtains, etc., the ventilation openings should be located in that space. 

- 2 The calculated ventilation area is strictly the minimum for safety and should be exceeded where possible. It does not in any way replace or reduce the normal adjustable ventilation provided by window, or the like. 

- 3 A refrigerator installed in a sealed recess is considered a room-sealed _appliance_ for the purpose of the above calculation. 

- 4 For _appliances_ with input ratings given in other units the following conversion factors may be used: 

1 kW =3.6 MJ/h 

1000 BTU/h =1.055 MJ/h 

- 5 The use of louvres and/or mesh screens will reduce the free area of an opening. Allowance should be made to ensure free areas are achieved. As a guide, where mesh is used, the area should be doubled. 







z <( 

>, .0 u (J) rn rn (J) u 

## **7.3.2 Special requirements for camper trailers and boats** 

On pop-up type recreational vehicles and _boats,_ ventilation shall be effective whether the top is up or down. For camper-trailers and _boats_ of the fully collapsible type, ventilation need only be effective when the structure is erected. 

## **7.3.3 Special requirements for RVs (motorized caravans)** 

In motorized _caravans,_ regardless of the location of the vehicle exhaust, vents shall not be installed in the rear wall. 

## 7.4 **POSITION OF OPENINGS-CARA VANS ONLY** 

## **7.4.1 Cross ventilation** 

The ventilation shall be provided by at least two openings fitted at opposite ends or sides of the compartment in accordance with Clauses 7.4.2 and 7.4.3. 

## **7 .4.2 Distance from ceiling** 

(J) "E "§_ C (J) .c :!: u (J) C ct! :::, Cl C 

Permanently open ventilation equal to a minimum of 50% of the required ventilation area shall be provided not lower than 150 mm from the ceiling, except that, if the ventilation is provided by an externally vented stove _range hood/extractor,_ the vent shall be not lower than 400 mm from the ceiling. 

## **7.4.3 Distance from floor** 

Ventilation equal to a minimum of 5 0% of the required ventilation area shall be provided as low as possible but not more than 150 mm from the compartment floor. 

_caravan_ NOTE: Ventilation through the floor of a may contravene road traffic authority requirements. 

## **7.4.4 Vent warning label** 

A permanent legible warning label with a mm1mum character height of 4 mm shall be affixed or adjacent to the upper and lower vents (see Clauses 7.4.2 and 7.4.3) and shall state- 

## **WARNING** 

This vent must remain permanently open, clean and unrestricted to provide ventilation when gas appliances are in use. 

## **7.5 POSITION OF OPENINGS-BOATS ONLY** 

Effective, unrestricted, permanent ventilation shall be provided, comprising at least two (2) _deck_ head to the openings fitted at opposite ends or sides of the cabin, or preferably, at the underside of the _deck._ 

NOTE: Where a _boat_ otherwise meets the requirements of this section but it is impractical to use the _boat_ without covering the permanent ventilation, a _carbon monoxide detector_ capable of detecting low concentrations of CO and having an audible alarm should be installed. 

## **7.6 GAS DETECTION SYSTEM REQUIRED-BOATS ONLY** 

Where an _appliance_ with a continuously burning flame is to be installed below the _upper deck_ of a _boat_ and there is no low level ventilation in the area where the is to be _appliance_ installed, a combustible _gas_ detection system complying with Appendix E shall be installed. 

NOTE: If 50% of the total ventilation required by Clause 7.3 is supplied at low level the requirement of this Clause will be satisfied. 






## MEANS OF COMPLIANCE-FLUEING 

||SECTION 8 - CONTENTS<br>MEANS OF COMPLIANCE-FLUEING|
|---|---|
||_Page_|







## SECTION 8 MEANS OF COMPLIANCE­ FLUEING 

## **8.1 FLUE CONSTRUCTION AND CLEARANCES** 

Unless the _flue_ is designed to prevent adjacent _combustible materials_ exceeding 50[°] C above ambient where a _flue_ passes through a wall or a roof, it shall be fitted with a protective sleeve of _fire resistant material,_ and be adequately secured. Where the structure includes _combustible material,_ a minimum clearance of 25 mm shall be provided between the _flue_ and the _combustible material._ shall be The effective internal cross-sectional area of the _flue_ not less than the outlet of the _gas appliance. Flues_ shall not be fitted with dampers. 

## **8.2 PROTECTION FROM ENVIRONMENT AL EFFECTS** 

Every _flue_ shall be fitted with a suitable 'effective _cowl'_ which prevents the ingress of rain. 

_Flues_ shall be constructed of materials that are suitable to withstand the effects of the environment. 

## **8.3 DISTURBANCES** 

_Flues_ shall be secured to withstand vehicle movement and weather conditions. 

## **8.4 LOCATION OF FLUE TERMINAL** 

## **8.4.1 General** 

_Flue terminals_ shall not be located within 300 mm of a ventilator, opening port, hatch or window, or within 500 mm of a refuelling point or fuel tank vent outlet. 

There shall be at least 50 mm clearance between the lowest opening of a _flue cowl_ and the roof of a _caravan._ 

## **8.4.2 Termination of a flue under a cover** 

Where the of a balanced _flue terminal flue appliance, room-sealed appliance,_ a fan-assisted _appliance_ or the _flue terminal_ of an _appliance_ designed for outdoor installation is to be installed under a covered area, where _combustion products_ might not readily disperse or a nuisance could occur, either- 

- ( a) the covered area shall be open on at least two sides and the terminal shall be located to ensure a free flow of air across it is achieved; or 

- (b) in the case of a fan-assisted _flue appliance_ only, when one side is open, the terminal shall be within 500 mm of the opening, discharging in the direction of the opening and there shall be no openings into the _caravan_ or _boat_ along the wall within that distance and the terminal shall be located to ensure that a free flow of air across it is achieved. 

NOTE: These requirements do not apply to domestic _gas_ barbecues and radiant _gas_ heaters designed for outdoor use. For these _appliances,_ refer to Appendix L. 





## **8.5 FLUE MATERIALS** 

Materials for _ajlue_ shall comply with Table 8.1. 


## **FLUE MATERIALS** 

||**TABLE 8.1**<br>**FLUE MATERIALS**||
|---|---|---|
|Material|Protective fnish|Application and limitations|
|Low temperature applications|(not exceeding 300°C)||
|Aluminium alloy 1100, 3003|None|Only where_accessible_fr|
|complying with**AS/NZS**1 734||inspection and renewal|
|Mild steel|Aluminized 122 g/m2, or Z275|Only where_accessible_fr|
|Minimum thickness 0.6 mm|zinc toAS 1397, or aluminium|inspection and renewal|
||zinc complying withAS 1397||
|High temperature applications|(up to 500°C)||
|Stainless steel|300 and 430 Series Grade||
|Minimum thickness 0.5 mm|||



## **8.6 PROPRIETARY FLUEING SYSTEMS** 

Proprietary flueing systems shall be suitable for the application and installed according to the _manufacturer's instructions._ 






## MEANS OF COMPLIANCE-TESTING AND COMMISSIONING 

||SECTION 9 - CONTENTS<br>MEANS OF COMPLIANCE-TESTING AND COMMISSIONING|
|---|---|
||_Page_|







SECTION 9 MEANS OF COMPLIANCE­ TESTING AND COMMISSIONING 

## **9.1 TESTING FOR GASTIGHTNESS** 

A gastightness test in accordance with Appendix F shall be carried out on all new installations and modifications to existing installations. 

## **9.2 COMMISSIONING** 

## **9.2.1 Commissioning of appliance** 

The commissioning of an _appliance_ shall take full account of special design features, the _manufacturer's instructions_ and the _appliance_ safety requirements. 

The commissioning of an _appliance_ shall include all of the following: 

- (a) Testing and purging of the _appliance_ and installation as appropriate. 

- (b) Checks to ensure the _appliance_ is in safe working order. 

- (c) Ignition of each _burner_ of the _appliance_ and, where necessary, adjustment m accordance with the _manufacturer's instructions._ 

- (d) Testing _ofjlue_ performance. 

- ( e) Testing of all safety devices for correct operation. 

- (f) Instruction of the consumer, where available, on the safe and correct operation of the _appliance_ and any auxiliary equipment. 

- (g) Handing of the _appliance_ operating instructions to the consumer, or if the consumer is not present, leaving the instructions in a suitable location on the premises. 

- NOTES: 

   - 1 See Appendix I for guidelines for _gas appliance_ commissioning. 

   - 2 See Appendix K for a checklist for checking compliance of the installation prior to and during commissioning. 

## **9.2.2 Other commissioning checks** 

_Appliance_ operating instructions, the label on the _LP Gas locker_ or _cylinder compartment,_ and any cautionary labels shall be checked to ensure they are displayed in prominent positions. 

and _Cylinders cylinder_ restraints shall be examined for damage or corrosion . 





## APPENDIX A 

## NORMATIVE REFERENCES 

(Normative) 

The following are the normative documents referenced in this Standard. 

NOTE: Documents referenced for informative purposes are listed in the Bibliography. 

- AS 1357 Valves primarily for use in heated water systems 

- 1357.1 Part 1: Protection valves 

- 1397 Continuous hot-dip metallic coated steel sheet and strip-Coatings of zinc and zinc alloyed with aluminium and magnesium 

- 1432 Copper tubes for plumbing, gasfitting and drainage applications 

- 1530 Methods for fire tests on building materials, components and structures 

- 1530.1 Part 1: Combustibility test for materials 

- 1572 Copper and copper alloys-Seamless tubes for engineering purposes 

- 2030 Gas cylinders 2030.1 Part 1: General requirements 

- 2738 Copper and copper alloys-Compositions and designations of refinery products, wrought products, ingots and castings 

- 3688 Water supply-Metallic fittings and end connectors 

- 3814 Industrial and commercial gas-fired appliances 

- 4617 Manual shut off gas valves 

- 4621 Regulators for use with liquefied petroleum-Vapour phase 

- 4623 Jointing compounds and materials for use in gas pipe joints 

- 4629 Automatic shut off valves and vent valves 

- D26 Tube fittings with Dryseal American standard taper pipe and unified threads for automotive and industrial use 

- AS ISO 7 Pipe threads where pressure-tight joints are made on the threads 7.1 Part 1: Dimensions, tolerances and designation AS/NZS 1530 Methods for fire tests on building materials, components and structures 

- 1530.3 Part 3: Simultaneous determination of ignitability, flame propagation, heat release and smoke release 

- 1596 The storage and handling of LP Gas 1734 Aluminium and aluminium alloys-Flat sheet, coiled sheet and plate 1869 Hose and hose assemblies for liquefied petroleum gases (LP Gas), natural gas and town gas 

- NZS 3501 Specification for copper tubes for water, gas, and sanitation 

ANSI 


UL 21 LP Gas Hose UL 144 LP Gas Regulators 





ASTM A269 Specification for seamless and welded austenitic stainless steel tubing for general service 

BS 3212 Specification for flexible rubber tubing, rubber hose and rubber hose assemblies for use in LPG vapour phase and LPG/air installations 

## **NEW ZEALAND LEGISLATION** 

Gas Act 1992 





## APPENDIX B 

## CONVERSION FACTORS 

## (Informative) 

The units of measurement used in this Standard are those based on the metric system and in common use within the gas industry. The listing in Table B 1 is presented as a ready reference for conversion between different units of measurement. 


|Multiply|By|To give|
|---|---|---|
|Length|||
|metres (m)|3.281|f t (f)|
|f t (f)|0.3048|metres (m)|
|Area|||
|square millimetres (mm2)|0.01|square centimetres ( cm2)|
|square millimetres (mm2)|0.00155|square inches (in2)|
|square inches (in2)|645.16|square millimetres (mm2)|
|square metres (m2)|10.764|square f t (f2)|
|square f t (f2)|0.0929|square metres (m2)|
|Volume|||
|cubic metres (m3)|35.315|cubic f t ( f3)|
|cubic f t ( f3)|0.0283|cubic metres (m3)|
|Energy|||
|British thermal units (BTU)|1.055|kilojoules (kJ)|
|therms|105.5|megajoules (MJ)|
|kilowatt hour (kWh)|3.6|megajoules (MJ)|
|megajoules (MJ)|0.2778|kilowatt hour (kWh)|
|Power|||
|megajoules per hour (MJ/h)|0.2778|kilowatts (kW)|
|kilowatts (kW)|3.6|megajoules per hour (MJ/h)|
|British thermal units per hour (BTU/h)|0.001055|megajoules per hour (MJ/h)|
|therms per hour|105.5|megajoules per hour (MJ/h)|
|Pressure|||
|millibar (mbar)|0.1|kilopascals (kPa)|
|kilopascals (kPa)|10.0|millibar (mbar)|
|pounds per square inch (lb/in2)(psi)|6.895|kilopascals (kPa)|
|kilopascals (kPa)|0.145|pounds per square inch (lb/in2) (psi)|
|inches water gauge (in.WG)@ 15°C|0.2488|kilopascals (kPa)|
|kilopascals (kPa)@ 15°|4.016|inches water gauge (in.WG)|
|Miscellaneous|||
|square millimetres per kilowatt|0.2778|square millimetres per|
|(mm2/kW)||(megajoule per hour) (mm2/(MJ/h))|







## APPENDIX C 

## FIRE RESISTANT MATERIAL 

(Normative) 

## **Cl GENERAL** 

The primary purpose of _fire resistant material_ is to provide thermal protection for a _combustible surface_ and, in certain applications, to support a load whilst maintaining its protective properties. 

Therefore, the material shall provide thermal insulation, which shall not be combustible, and, if required, the material shall have physical properties that will enable it to support a known load with acceptable deformation. 

In the following specification for _fire resistant material,_ the required minimum thermal and physical properties are stated and a simple formula is given for calculating the thickness of material to provide for minimum thermal protection. 

## **C2 SPECIFICATION FOR FIRE RESIST ANT MATERIAL** 

_Fire resistant material_ shall have the following properties of (a) or (b) and, in addition, the properties of ( c ), ( d), and ( e ): 

- (a) When tested to AS 1530.1, be deemed not combustible. 

- (b) When tested to AS/NZS 1530.3, have an index as follows: 

   - (i) Ignitability-zero (0). 

   - (ii) Spread of flame-zero (0). 

   - (iii) Heat evolved-zero (0). 

   - (iv) Smoke developed-zero to one (0 to 1). 

- ( c) A minimum thickness of 6 mm and a resulting coefficient of heat transfer ( _U)_ not more than 20 W/m[2] K. 

   - NOTE: The heat transfer coefficient _(U),_ in W/m[2] K, thermal resistance (R), in m[2] K/W, thermal conductivity (k), in W/mK, and thickness (t), in metres, of materials are related by the following formulas: 

      - _U_ **=** _IIR_ 

      - _R_ **=** _t/k_ 


- (d) If required to support a load, a compressive strength of not less than 1.5 MPa. 

- (e) If required to support a load, deform not more than 2% of its thickness when subjected to a compressive stress of 350 kPa. 





## **C3 EXAMPLES TO DETERMINE REQUIRED THICKNESS OF FIRE RESISTANT MATERIAL** 

## **Example 1** 

_Fire resistant material_ from supplier 'A' has a thermal conductivity of 0.21 W /mK. 

What minimum thickness of the material should be used? 


## **Example 2** 

_Fire resistant material_ from supplier 'B' has a thermal conductivity of 0.11 W/mK. What minimum thickness of the material should be used? 


   - = 0.11/20 



In Example 2, as the value of _t_ is less than the minimum thickness requirement of 6 mm, material of at least 6 mm is required. 

## **C4 ACCEPTABLE METHODS OF PROTECTION** 

The methods detailed in Table Cl may be used for the protection of _combustible surfaces._ 

All toughened safety glass used as a cooker splashback shall be marked as 'toughened safety glass' to indicate that it is fit for purpose. 

## **TABLE Cl** 

## **ACCEPTABLE METHODS FOR PROTECTION OF COMBUSTIBLE SURFACES** 

||Minimum||Minimum|
|---|---|---|---|
|Facing material|thickness|Backing material|thickness|
||mm||mm|
|||Gypsum-based wall board|IO|
|Ceramic tiles|5|||
|||Fibre cement board|6|
|Toughened safty glass (See Note)|5|Gypsum-based wall board<br>Fibre cement board|10<br>6|
|||Fibre cement board|12|
|Sheet metal|0.4|Fibre cement board over 10 mm<br>gypsum-based wall board|6|
|Any other system|Satisfing the temperature requirement in||Clause 6.5|



NOTE: Toughened safety glass should comply with AS/NZS 2208 . 




(J) "E "§_ C (J) .c :!: u (J) C ct! :::, Cl C 



APPENDIX D 

## PIPE SIZING 

(Informative) 

## **D1 INTRODUCTION** 

## **D1.1 General** 

The flow graphs and tables in this Appendix have been compiled through consistent application of the flow formulas used and make allowances for _pressure_ losses that occur due to fittings. The 'longest length' or 'index length' method of pipe sizing has been used. 

The pipe sizing table indicates the flow of _gas,_ in megajoules per hour, through copper pipes to AS 1432 and NZS 3501. The heating value quoted in each table is a nominal figure typical of _LP Gas._ 

The method described in this Appendix is suitable for _LP Gas_ where the allowable _pressure_ drop is 0.25 kPa. The sizing of _piping_ for materials or conditions other than those in the pipe sizing table of this Appendix should be determined using recognized formulae, graphs or tables such as those in Appendix F of AS/NZS 5601.1. 

## **D1.2 Pipe conditions** 

The flows have been calculated assuming pipes of minimum internal diameter (which comply with the relevant Standard) that are horizontal and free from defects, deterioration and/or the accumulation of foreign matter. Pipes are taken to be smooth, that 1s, zero roughness. 

## **D1.3 Fitting allowance** 

A fitting allowance equivalent to a 50% extension of the length for each point calculated is made. For example, when calculating the flow for a given type of _gas_ in a pipe 20 m in length and a set of conditions (diameter, _pressure_ drop, roughness), the flow has been calculated for 30 m (being 1.5 x 20) and the value obtained entered in the 20 m column. 

## **D1.4 Equations used** 

For low flow rates, the theoretically derived laminar equation is used. For higher flows, the International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC) equations (low _pressure_ and high _pressure)_ are employed. The properties of the _gas_ are assumed as HHV 96 MJ/m[3] , SG 1.5 and viscosity 8 µPa.s. 

## **D1.5 Excessive gas velocities** 

Values shown in Tables D5 and D6 shaded in grey are not recommended and should not be used unless verified by a _competent person._ These would fall above the grey dotted lines 'velocity threshold' on the pipe sizing graphs. High _gas_ velocity through _piping_ may cause noise and, over time, accelerated erosion of the pipe or fittings. 

## **D2 NEW PIPING SYSTEMS** 

When sizing a new _piping_ system, consideration should be given to foreseeable future needs. 

## **D3 EXISTING PIPING SYSTEMS** 

Where an additional _appliance_ is to be connected to an existing _piping_ system, the existing _piping_ and regulator should be checked to ensure that adequate capacity is available for the additional load. 





## **D4 INFORMATION REQUIRED** 

When determining the size of _piping_ to be used in an installation using the graphs or tables in this Appendix, the following information should first be obtained: 

- (a) The _gas consumption_ of each _appliance_ (MJ/h) and the required input _pressure._ 

- (b) The diversity, if any, arising from use of different _gas appliances_ at different times. 

- ( c) The proposed layout of the _piping_ system including all pipe lengths and the location of each _appliance._ 

- ( d) The _pressure_ available at the start of the _piping._ 

- (e) The allowable _pressure_ drop. The _pressure_ drop should ensure that at least the minimum inlet _pressure_ required by the _appliance_ is available at the _appliance._ 

   - NOTE: The tables and graphs in this Appendix include an allowance for the number of fittings that could be expected to be used in good practice. 

## **D5 DESIGN PROCEDURE USING PIPE SIZING GRAPHS** 

## **D5.1 Introduction** 

A worked example is given to explain a graphical method of pipe sizing for a typical _piping_ system using _LP Gas_ with a _pressure_ of 3 kPa at the start of the _piping._ Design graphs for _LP Gas_ (propane) in copper pipe to AS 1432 or NZS 3501 are given in Figure D3 or D4, respectively. Multiply any input ratings in kW by 3.6 to convert to MJ/h if necessary. 

## **D5.2 Sketch the** _**piping**_ **layout** 

Sketch the intended _piping_ layout (see Figure Dl), include the _appliance_ positions and allocate a letter to each _gas appliance_ position and each pipe junction. 





FIGURE D1 EXAMPLE OF PIPING LAYOUT 





## **D5.3 Tabulate the pipe runs** 

Draw up a table with a row for each pipe run, as shown in Table D 1. 

## **TABLE Dl** 

## **INST ALLA TI ON DETAILS** 

|Pipe section|Length, m|Gas fow, MJ/h|Pipe size, mm (see Note)|
|---|---|---|---|
|B-C|4|60+135 = 195||
|C-D|2|135||
|C-E|1|60||
|B-F|6|80 + 188=268||
|F-G|3|188||
|F-H|2|80||



NOTE: Pipe size is to be determined according to Paragraph D5.6. 

## **D5.4 Determine the length of the longest pipe run** 

The longest run of _piping_ from the meter to the furthest _gas appliance_ position is pipe section A-G. The length of this section is 16 m (AB+ BF+ FG). 

## **D5.5 Determine the allowable pressure drop per metre** 

The design _pressure_ drop is 0.25 kPa. Divide this by the length of the longest pipe run, 16 m, to give the allowable _pressure_ drop of 0.0156 kPa/m. 

## **D5.6 Determine the required pipe size from the pipe sizing graphs** 

Select the pipe sizing graph in Figure D3 or D4 appropriate to the type of _gas_ available and the chosen _piping_ material. For example, if copper pipe to NZS 3501 is being used, the applicable graph is Figure D4 (reproduced in Figure D2). Mark the _pressure_ drop value of 0.0156 kPa/m on the graph. Find the value of _gas_ flow for each pipe section on the graph and read off the size of the pipe required and enter this in the installation table (Table D 1 ). 





FIGURE D2 EXAMPLE OF PIPE SIZING FOR LP GAS IN COPPER PIPE TO NZS 3501 





Section A-B has a total flow rate of 463 MJ/h. Find 463 on the _gas_ flow axis and draw a line up to the line at 0.0156 kPa/m for _pressure_ drop. These lines intersect between the curves for 20 mm and 25 mm pipe sizes. The required pipe size is 25 mm, the larger size. 

Repeat this procedure for each of the other pipe sections, entering the values in the table that has been drawn up to give Table D2. 


## **INST ALLA TI ON DETAILS** 

|Pipe section|Length, m|Gas fow, MJ/h|Pipe size, mm|
|---|---|---|---|
|B-C|4|60 + 135=195|20|
|C-D|2|135|20|
|C-E|1|60|15|
|B-F|6|80 + 188=268|25|
|F-G|3|188|20|
|F-H|2|80|15|



## **D5. 7 Pipe sizing graphs** 

Pipe sizing graphs for _LP Gas_[(] propane[) ] in copper pipe to AS 1432 or NZS 3501 are given in Figure D3 or D4, respectively . 





FIGURE D3 PIPE SIZING FOR LP GAS THROUGH COPPER PIPE (AS 1432) 









FIGURE D4 PIPE SIZING FOR LP GAS THROUGH COPPER PIPE (NZS 3501) 

## **D6 DESIGN PROCEDURE USING PIPE SIZING TABLES** 

## **D6.1 General** 

A worked example is given to explain a method of pipe sizing using _pressure_ drop tables for a typical _piping_ system that using _LP Gas_ with a _pressure_ of 3 kPa at the start of the _piping._ 

## **D6.2 Sketch the piping layout** 

Sketch the intended _piping_ layout (see Figure DI), include the _appliance_ positions and add the following: 

- (a) All pipe lengths (in metres) and the _gas consumption_ of each _appliance_ (in MJ/h) . 

- (b) Allocate a letter to each branch, commencing at the regulator with the letter 'A'. 

- ( c) Allocate a letter to each _appliance_ position. 

## **D6.3 Determine the main run** 

The _main run_ is the length of _piping_ from the _cylinder_ regulator to the furthest _appliance_ position. The _main run_ length is a critical measurement that will be used throughout the pipe sizing calculations. 

The _main run_ in Figure DI is from the _cylinders_ to the instantaneous _water heater,_ length A to G which is 16 m. 

The distance covered by the _main run_ of the installation is then used to size all branch _main run._ pipework for their respective loads as if they were all as long as the 

## **D6.4 Select the piping material** 

Select the material that will be used in constructing the _piping_ system. 

AS 1432 Type C copper _piping_ is used for the example. 





## **D6.5 Tabulate the pipe runs** 

Draw up a table with a row for each pipe run, as in Table D3, as follows: 

- (a) Indicate, in the column marked 'Pipe section', each section of _piping_ including each branch. 

- (b) Indicate, in the column marked 'Gas flow', the amount of _gas_ (MJ/h) flowing through each section. 

- ( c) The column indicating _nominal size_ will be completed in Paragraph D6.6 and Table D4. 

## **TABLE D3** 

## **INST ALLA TI ON DETAILS** 

|Pipe section|Main run, m|Gas fow, MJ/h|Nominal size DN|
|---|---|---|---|
|B-F||80+188=268||
|C-D|(see|135||
|C-E|Paragraph D6.3)|60||
|F-G||188||
|F-H||80||



## **D6.6 Selecting the pipe size** 

Refer to Table D5, select the pipe size as follows: 

- (a) Determine _main run_ length (see Paragraph D6.3). 

- (b) If the _main run_ falls between two figures, use the greater. 

- (c) Section A to B has a total flow rate of 463 MJ/h. Follow the 16 m column down until the value of 463 or the next larger value is reached, in this case, 718. 

- (d) Read across to the column ('Norn. dia. DN') to obtain the pipe size, 32 mm in this example. 

- (e) Insert the pipe size in the prepared table (see Table D4). 

- (f) Determine the pipe size of the remaining sections, continuing to use the _main run_ length (16 m in the example), not the individual length of each section . 

## **TABLE D4** 

## **INST ALLA TI ON DETAILS** 

|Pipe section|Main run, m|Gas fow, MJ/h|Nominal size DN|
|---|---|---|---|
|C-D|16|135|20|
|C-E||60|20|
|F-G||188|25|
|F-H||80|20|







## **D6. 7 Pipe sizing tables** 

Pipe sizing table for _LP Gas_ (propane) in copper pipe to AS 1432 or NZS 3501 are given in Table D5 or D6, respectively. 

## **TABLE D5** 


||Nor.||||Length|of straight|pipe, m||||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||dia.||||||||||
||DN|2|4|6|8|10|12|14|16|18|
||15|159|109|88|75|67|60|55|52|48|
||20|525|361|290|248|220|199|183|170|160|
|I|<br>25<br>32<br>40|115J<br><212<br>37|793<br>1520<br>2558|637<br>1221<br>2054|545<br>1045m<br>1758|483<br>437<br> -926a--839,,,<br>1558<br>1412||402 "<br> _w-,,7,2_<br>1299|'71<br>"<br>718<br>1208|<br>351<br>674<br>1134|
||so|8564|5886|4727|4045|3585|3249|2989|2780|2609|
||65|15862|10902|8754|7493|6641|6017|5535|5150|4832|
||80|25220|17334|13920|11913|10559|9567|8801|8188|7683|
|||20|25|30|35|40|45|50|55|60|
||20|151|134|121|112|104|97|92|87|83|
||25|332|294|266|245|228|214|202|192|183|
||32|636|564|511|470|437|410|388|368|351|
||40|1071|949|860|791|736|691|652|620|591|
||so|2464|2184|1979|1820|1694|1589|1501|1426|1360|
||65|4564|4045|3665|3372|3137|2943|2780|2640|2519|
||80|7257|6432|5828|5361|4988|4680|4420|4198|4005|
||100|16039|14215|12880|11849|11023|10343|9770|9279|8852|
||125|29394|26051|23604|21716|20202|18955|17905|17005|16223|
||150|47281|41904|37968|34930|32496|30490|28800|27353|26095|



NOTE: Use of values printed in shaded areas is not recommended and require professional advice. Please refer to Paragraph DI where further, detailed explanation is provided on these values and the use of the tables in general. 





## **TABLE D6** 

## **PROPANE-FLOW THROUGH-COPPER PIPE (NZS 3501) (MJ/h) (Pressure drop of 0.25 kPa; suitable for supply pressures around 3 kPa)** 

|Nor.||||Length|of straight|pipe, m||||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|dia.||||||||||
|DN|2|4|6|8|10|12|14|16|18|
|10|123|85|68|58|<br>52|47|43|40|38|
|15|264|181|146|125|<br>110|100|92|86|80|
|20|759|521|419|358|<br>318|288|265|246|231|
|25|1625|1117|897|767|<br>680|616|567|527|495|
|32|2929|2013|1617|1384|<br>1226|1111|1022|951|892|
|40|4706|3234|2597|2223|<br>1970|1785|1642|1528|1433|
|50|10008|6878|5524|4727|<br>4190|3796|3493|3249|3049|
||20|25|30|35|40|45|50|55|60|
|10|35|31|28|26|<br>24|23|22|20|20|
|15|76|67|61|56|<br>52|49|46|44|42|
|20|218|193|175|161|<br>150|141|133|126|120|
|25|467|414|375|345|<br>321|301|285|270|258|
|32|843|747|677|623|<br>579|543|513|488|465|
|40|1354|1200|1087|1000|<br>931|873|825|783|747|
|50|2880|2552|2312|2127|<br>1979|1857|1754|1666|1589|



NOTE: Use of values printed in shaded areas is not recommended and require professional advice. Please refer to Paragraph D1 where further, detailed explanation is provided on these values and the use of the tables in general. 





## APPENDIX E 

## COMBUSTIBLE GAS DETECTION SYSTEMS FOR BOATS 

(Normative) 

## **El GENERAL** 

This Appendix specifies the minimum requirements for a combustible _gas_ detection system that is to be installed in a _boat_ where Clause 7 .6 applies. 

NOTE: Some local marine regulations require petrol-fuelled _boats_ to have a bilge blower. 

## **E2 GAS DETECTION SYSTEM** 

The _gas_ detection system shall comply with all of the following: 

- (a) Be suitable for the marine environment. 

- (b) Be waterproof, resistant to corrosion and the entry of dust. 

- ( c) Be capable of continuous operation from a low voltage source (i.e., wired direct to a battery) and indicate the operational status within 30 s of power being supplied. 

- ( d) Components within the minimum clearance zone defined in AS/NZS 1596 to be suitable for that location . 

- ( e) Have at least two outlets for connection of external equipment ( e.g., _gas_ solenoid valve, audible alarm, bilge blower etc.). 

- (f) Activate the alarm function and cause a solenoid valve to close off the _gas_ supply whenever the concentration of _LP Gas_ in air exceeds 25% of the lower _explosive limit._ 

- (g) Have a latching system that continues to indicate an alarm condition until cancelled. 

- (h) Be self-checking and indicate both normal and fault conditions. 

- (i) Have fully serviceable units and be supplied with full installation and operating instructions. 

- (j) All switches shall indicate their operational position. This indication shall be permanently marked. NOTE: The use of adhesive labelling will not satisfy this requirement. 

- (k) Markings on the fascia of the unit, including the manufacturer's name and address, shall be permanent. 

   - NOTE: The use of adhesive labelling will not satisfy this requirement. 

## **E3 INSTALLATION OF THE SYSTEM** 

## **E3.1 Solenoid valve** 

The solenoid valve shall be located between the _cylinder_ and the first-stage _gas pressure regulator._ 

The solenoid valve shall be suitable for the _pressure_ rating. 

## **E3.2 Position of audible alarm** 

The alarm of the _gas_ detection system shall be positioned to ensure that it is audible from all locations on the _boat_ when the _boat_ is under normal operating conditions. 





## **E3.3 Sensors** 

A minimum of two sensors shall be fitted. One sensor shall be fitted in the bilge or at the lowest level where _gas_ would be likely to accumulate and one in the vicinity of the _appliance,_ but below the level of the lowest flame. 

Each sensor shall have the following: 

- (a) A visual indication of the condition of the sensor-'safe or malfunction'. 

- (b) A visual indication of an alarm condition. This shall be separate from Item (a) above. 

- **E3.4 Operation of the system when gas is detected** 

When _gas_ is detected at or above the minimum set level, all of the following shall occur: 

- (a) The _gas_ supply shall be automatically shut off by the solenoid valve and shall not be re-opened until the alarm has been manually cancelled and the system reset. 

- (b) The audible alarm shall sound. 

- ( c) The visual alarm shall be activated. 





## APPENDIX F 

## TESTING GAS INSTALLATIONS 

(Normative) 

## **Fl GENERAL** 

A gastightness test shall be carried out using one of the methods specified in Paragraphs F2 and F3. 

## **F2 METHOD 1-MEASURING PRESSURE LOSS** 

## **F2.1 Test procedure** 

The procedure shall be as follows: 

- (a) Ensure the installation is disconnected from the _cylinder._ 

- (b) Ensure all open ends are plugged or capped. 

- ( c) Ensure all _gas appliances_ are turned off at the _appliance_ valve(s ). 

- (d) Connect a suitable _pressure_ gauge (a manometer, for example). 


- (f) Isolate the _pressure_ source and allow a suitable period (2 min) for the temperature of the testing medium within the _piping_ to stabilize. 

- (g) Measure the loss of _pressure_ during a test period of 5 min. 

## **F2.2 Test result** 

The pipework shall be considered _gastight_ if there is no loss of _pressure_ during the test period. 

## **F3 METHOD 2-USING BUBBLE LEAKAGE DETECTOR** 

## **F3.1 Test procedure** 

The procedure shall be as follows: 

- (a) Connect the bubble test set between the _LP Gas cylinder_ valve and the _LP Gas_ regulator. 

- (b) Ensure all open ends are plugged or capped. 

- (c) Ensure all _gas appliances_ are turned off at the _appliance_ valve(s). 

- (d) Open the _LP Gas cylinder_ valve or apply _pressure_ using compressed air or inert _gas._ 

- ( e) Allow the system to pressurize for 5 s then depress the 'diversion valve' so that the _gas_ stream passes through the liquid bowl. 

- (f) While depressing the 'diversion valve' observe the liquid bowl for evidence of bubbles through the liquid. 

## **F3.2 Test result** 

The pipework shall be considered _gastight_ if there are no bubbles through the liquid for a period of 10 s. 

If bubbles are detected, any leakage shall be located and rectified, and the installation shall be retested. 





j C: ( d) Close _cylinder_ valve when _appliances_ are not m use or whilst refuelling is in "§_ progress. C: Q) .r:: :s: (e) No _appliance_ with a continuously burning flame shall be left operating in any petrol "O Q) Q) driven _boat_ when left unattended for a period of, or in excess of, 12 h. "E e! ct! (f) Never use cooking _appliances_ for comfort heating. :::, Cl 0 (g) When the _boat_ is fitted with a flammable _gas detector,_ the _gas detector_ shall be C: _boat_ shall be cleared of  checked for the presence of flammable vapours and the C:  flammable vapour before lighting any _LP Gas appliance_ or starting the motor. "E :5 u (h) In the event of fire, immediately close _cylinder_ valve if safe to do so. Q) E u :::, (i) Ensure valve is closed and fit _gastight_ sealing plug to all spare _cylinders_ not e, 0 connected, whether full or empty. "<t 0 C\I U) All additions or alterations to the _LP Gas_ system shall be performed by _an authorized_ .0 Q) _person_ (consult your _LP Gas_ supplier) . LL (.0 C\I NOTE: _Appliances_ should not be altered without the authorization of the manufacturer. >­C: 0 ([k] ) All permanent ventilators, _flues_ and vents shall be checked regularly to ensure they 0 (? are clear, open and unrestricted. ...J 0 z I (1) In the event of an accidental _gas_ leak, close _cylinder_ valve and ventilate the area 0 UJ using a safe method until the air is clear. I­ 0 LL (m) _Gas_ or carbon monoxide detection systems shall be maintained to the _manufacturer's_  _recommendations._ ci5 a: NOTE: Persons should familiarize themselves with the odour of unburnt _LP Gas_ to assist in the UJ > early detection of leaks. z ::J z <( ii: § > >, .0 "O Q) rn rn Q) u 

## APPENDIX G 

## CONSUMER INSTRUCTIONS 

(Normative) 

This Appendix specifies the information, including warning labels where appropriate, together with the _appliance manufacturer's instructions,_ which shall be provided to the customer. 

Consumer instructions for _gas installations_ shall be as follows: 

   - NOTE: The following are applicable to both _caravans_ and _boats_ except where indicated otherwise. 

- (a) Close _appliance_ valves before opening _cylinder_ valve. 

- (b) Check connection at the _appliances,_ regulators and _cylinders_ periodically for leaks with soapy water, or its equivalent. 

      - NOTE: This should be done at least annually. 

- (c) Never use a match or flame when checking leaks. 

_LP Gas_ to assist in the NOTE: Persons should familiarize themselves with the odour of unburnt early detection of leaks. 






## APPENDIX H 

## METHOD OF LOCATING GAS PRESSURE REGULATORS 

(Informative) 

Figure Hl illustrates a recommended method of locating a _cylinder_ regulator. 

Pigtail with gasflow rising to regulator inlet 




Cylinder<br>valves<br>


## NOTES: 

- 1 Only copper _pigtails_ or flexible hoses with low extractable content should be used. 

- 2 The regulator should be located to permit drainage of any liquid back into the _cylinder ._ 

## FIGURE H1 LOCATION OF CYLINDER REGULATOR 





## APPENDIX I 

## GUIDELINES FOR GAS APPLIANCE COMMISSIONING 

(Informative) 

## **11 GENERAL** 

The following procedures should be used for the comm1ss10ning of domestic and small commercial in the absence of the _gas appliances manufacturer's relevant instructions:_ 

- (a) Remove or loosen test screw, connect a manometer and light the _gas appliance._ (Electronic _gas appliances_ require a digital manometer, as water gauge manometers are not accurate or sensitive enough). 

- (b) If a pilot light is used, check that pilot impinges on flame failure device. (Thermocouples should not glow red, as this indicates the pilot flame is set too high and will reduce the life of the thermocouple). 

- ( c) Check _gas pressure,_ against rating plate. (Remember that some _gas appliances_ have both a cold and hot pressure). 

- ( d) Adjust _gas pressure_ to specifications. (Remember some _gas appliances_ have both a low and high-pressure setting.) 

- ( e) Lock off the _gas appliance_ regulator. 

- (f) Remove the manometer and replace the test screw, test for leaks. 

- (g) Turn _gas appliance_ off and on, and up and down (if modulating type) several times, to ensure correct operation and smooth ignition. 

- (h) Observe operation of safety and operating devices (such as fan proving, ODS and tilt switch if mobile or portable type). 

- (i) Test that spillage of _combustion products_ is not occurring. 

- U[)] Replace panels or covers. 

- (k) Instruct householder in correct operation and regular maintenance requirements. 

after maintenance The same procedures should be followed to re-commission the _appliance_ or repair. 

## **12 STOVES, COOKERS AND HOT PLATES** 

In addition to the procedures in Paragraph I 1, for stoves, cookers and hot plates- 

- ( a) check ventilation to the _gas appliance_ ( especially if inbuilt); 

- (b) check distances from the _burners_ to combustible surfaces comply with Figure 6.1; ( c) check that the _gas appliance_ is level; 

- ( d) check the restraining device ( chain for example) on freestanding cookers; 

- ( e) check the flexible hose for wear and damage, and ensure it is not kinked; and 

- (f) check operation of the oven thermostat and adjust low flame by-pass if necessary. 






## **13 INSTANTANEOUS WATER HEATERS** 

In addition to the procedures in Paragraph I 1, for instantaneous water heaters­ 


- (b) check and, if necessary, adjust maximum water flow rate. Use a flow meter, or a measured receptacle and a stopwatch; 

- ( c) light the _gas appliance_ and check the outlet temperature against rating plate; 

- ( d) subtract inlet temperature from outlet temperature, to calculate temperature rise; 

- ([e] ) if all is correct, the water heater will have raised the temperature of the water by the specified amount, at the flow rate indicated. If not, re-check _gas pressure,_ and then injector sizes; and 

- (f) if still not correct, check with the manufacturer. 

NOTE: Electronically operated and controlled instantaneous water heaters have the same information on their rating plate, but the commissioning and checking procedures differ, and the _manufacturer's relevant instructions_ should be followed. 

## **14 STORAGE WATER HEATERS** 

In addition to the procedures in Paragraph I 1, for storage water heaters­ 

- ( a) check operation of the water valves; 

- (b) check that the temperature-pressure relief valve or pressure relief valve 1s not dripping, or the open vent is not overflowing; and 

- ([c] ) check operation of the thermostat. 





## APPENDIX J 

## SYMBOLS USED IN GAS CONTROL SYSTEM DIAGRAMS 

(Informative) 


## **C>-<J** Manual gas valve 

2 Filter --03 Pressure point ...£... 


u "E (J) "§_ C .c (J) :!: u .l!l (J) C  ct! Cl :::, 0 C 

5 Pressure regulator with over-pressure protection  

6 Over-pressure protection slam shut valve  7 Slow-opening fast-closing value _i_ **..c:::::L.** Slow-opening fast-closing two stage 8 _i_ valve _Automatic safety shut-off valves_ 9  Fast-opening fast-closing valve **--==:a..** Fast-opening fast-closing two stage 10  valve 11 Manual reset valve  12 Vent valve  13 Closed position indicator (CPI) switch on valve c:tc::i Proof of closure switch on valve 14  ( e.g., mechanical over-travel) 15 Low gas pressure detector  16 High gas pressure detector  17 Flow rate control valve  18 Flow limiting valve  










## APPENDIX K 

## GAS INSTALLATION CHECKLIST 

(Informative) 

This checklist, as shown below, is provided as guidance for installers to check compliance of a _gas_ installation with the AS/NZS 5601 series. 

The checklist is not exhaustive, and both Parts 1 and 2 of the AS/NZS 5601 series should be consulted when assessing any _gas_ installation to ensure that the essential safety requirements are met. 

## **GAS INSTALLATION CHECKLIST** 

|Consumer|||Date|||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Address|||Certifcate No.|||
||||Job No.|||
|Item|C|NA||Notes||
|General requirements||||||
|Gas supply verifed||||||
|Installation tested and gastight||||||
|Gas pipework||||||
|General requirements||||||
|Design||||||
|Location||||||
|Supports and anchoring||||||
|Corrosion protection||||||
||||||_(continued_|







## **GAS INSTALLATION CHECKLIST** _(continued)_ 

|Item|C|NA|Notes|
|---|---|---|---|
|Gas pipework (continued)||||
|Materials and components||||
|Isolating valves||||
|Pressure regulation||||
|Overpressure protection||||
|Vent lines||||
|Test points||||
|Expansion and contraction||||
|Pipe protection||||
|Flexible connections||||
|Earthing||||
|Pipeline identifcation||||
|Disconnection||||
|Soundness testing||||
|Sizing||||
|Appliance installation||||
|_Appliance(s)_declaration||||
|Mounting and restraint||||
|Location||||
|Clearances||||
|Disconnection||||
|Combustible surfces||||
|Temperature safty||||



_(continued)_ 





## **GAS INSTALLATION CHECKLIST** _(continued)_ 

|Item|C|NA|Notes|
|---|---|---|---|
|Flues||||
|Design||||
|Manufcturer's specifcations<br>fllowed||||
|Installation and location||||
|Materials||||
|Structure and supports||||
|Clearances||||
|Temperature safty||||
|Draught diverter||||
|Terminal and clearances||||
|Ventilation||||
|_Appliances_input||||
|Requirements||||
|Sizing of openings||||
|Location of openings||||
|Air not contaminated||||
|Mechanical ventilation||||
|LP Gas installations||||
|Location||||
|Clearances||||
|Weather protection||||
|Ventilation||||
|Drainage||||



_(continued)_ 





## **GAS INSTALLATION CHECKLIST** _(continued)_ 

|Item|C|NA||Notes||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|LP Gas installations (continued)||||||
|Restraint chains||||||
|Hoses and fttings||||||
|Labelling and signage||||||
|Commissioning||||||
|Purging||||||
|Controls tested and set||||||
|Safty devices tested and set||||||
|Gas rating||||||
|Combustion testing||||||
|Consumer instruction||||||
|Certifcation||||||
|Certifcate issued||||||
|C = Compliant||||||
|NA= Not Applicable||||||
|Name|||Signature||Reg. No.|







## APPENDIX L 

## APPLIANCES IN OUTDOOR AREAS 

(Informative) 

## **Ll DIAGRAMMATIC REPRESENTATION OF OUTDOOR AREAS** 

The following figures are diagrammatical representations of outdoor areas as described in the definition. The areas used in these figures are examples-the same principles apply to any other shaped area. 



I<br>I<br>I<br>I<br>I<br>I<br>I<br>I<br>I<br>I I ,/ ,<br>I'<br>



FIGURE L 1 EXAMPLE OF AN ENCLOSURE WITH WALLS ON ALL SIDES, BUT AT LEAST ONE PERMANENT OPENING AT GROUND LEVEL AND NO OVERHEAD COVER 










Both<br>/Both<br>ends open<br>






at least 25% of Open side  D the remaining wall area 30% or more in total of<br>total wall area  is open and unrestricted<br>









/<br>at least 25% of Open side  D the remaining wall area 30% or more in total of<br>total wall area  is open and unrestricted<br>


## FIGURE LS OUTDOOR AREA-EXAMPLE 5 

## **L2 DOMESTIC GAS BARBECUES AND RADIANT GAS HEATERS** 

Domestic _gas_ barbecues and radiant _gas_ heaters designed for outdoor use should be installed outdoors or in areas complying with the above diagrammatical representations of areas that are considered as outdoors. 

NOTE: These requirements do not apply to _appliances with.flue terminals._ For _appliances_ with _flue terminals,_ refer to Clause 8.4.2. 





## BIBLIOGRAPHY 

**AS/NZS** 2208 Safety glazing materials in buildings 3000 Electrical installations (known as the Australian/New Zealand Wiring Rules) 5601 Gas installations 5601.1 Part 1: General installations 

## **AUSTRALIAN LEGISLATION** 

Uniform Shipping Laws Code 

## **NEW ZEALAND LEGISLATION** 

Gas (Safety and Measurement) Regulations 2010 

Hazardous Substances (Compressed _Gases)_ Regulations 2004 Maritime Transport Act 1994 

## **OTHER** 

IFGC-International Fuel Gas Code 



(J) "E "§_ C (J) .c :!: u (J) C ct! :::, Cl C C  :5 u "E (J) u :::, 0 "<t C\I .0 (J) LL (.0 C\I C >­0 (? 0 ...J 0 z I 0 UJ I­ LL 0  ci5 a: UJ > z z <( >, .0 u (J) rn rn (J) u 

## INDEX 








(J) "E "§_ C (J) .c :!: u (J) C ct! :::, Cl C 



## **Flue** 




(J) "E "§_ C (J) ..c :!: u (J) C ct! :::, Cl C 


z <( >, .0 u (J) rn rn (J) u 

**Lower explosive limit,** definition ... 1.7.20.2 

## **LP Gas** 


## **Materials, fittings and components** 


## **Over-pressure protection** 


## **Pipe sizing** 





**Upper explosive limit,** definition ... 1.7.20.1 

## **Ventilation** 



## **Standards Australia** 

Standards Australia is an independent company, limited by guarantee, which prepares and publishes most of the voluntary technical and commercial standards used in Australia. These standards are developed through an open process of consultation and consensus, in which all interested parties are invited to participate. Through a Memorandum of Understanding with the Commonwealth government, Standards Australia is recognized as Australia's peak national standards body. 

## **Standards New Zealand** 

The first national Standards organization was created in New Zealand in 1932. The Standards Council of New Zealand is the national authority responsible for the production of Standards. Standards New Zealand is the trading arm of the Standards Council established under the Standards Act 1988. 

## **Australian/New Zealand Standards** 

Under a Memorandum of Understanding between Standards Australia and Standards New Zealand, Australian/New Zealand Standards are prepared by committees of experts from industry, governments, consumers and other sectors. The requirements or recommendations contained in published Standards are a consensus of the views of representative interests and also take account of comments received from other sources. They reflect the latest scientific and industry experience. Australian/New Zealand Standards are kept under continuous review after publication and are updated regularly to take account of changing technology. 

## **International Involvement** 

Standards Australia and Standards New Zealand are responsible for ensuring that the Australian and New Zealand viewpoints are considered in the formulation of international Standards and that the latest international experience is incorporated in national and Joint Standards. This role is vital in assisting local industry to compete in international markets. Both organizations are the national members of ISO (the International Organization for Standardization) and IEC (the International Electrotechnical Commission). 

## **Visit our web sites** 

## **www.standards.erg.au** 





GPO Box 476 Sydney NSW 2001 **Phone** (02) 9237 6000 **Fax** (02) 9237 6010 **Email** mail@standards.org.au **Internet** www.standards.org.au 



_**STANDARDS NEW ZEALAND PAEREWA AOTEAROA**_ 

Level6 

8 G ilmer Terrace Wellington 6011 (Private Bag 2439 Wellington 6140) **Freephone** 0800 782 632 **Phone** (04) 498 5990 **Fax** (04) 498 5994 **Email** enquiries@standards.co.nz **Website** www.standards.co.nz 

ISBN 978 1 74342 581 7 

Printed in Australia 



